Chapter 2
Shovel Knight / Verbs
DOI: 10.1201/9781003346586-2

Shovel Knight is a great game.
Shovel Knight came out in 2014 when indie games were just becoming a
thing. Shovel Knight is a great example of the retro movement, where
games are created to honor the classic games of old. Shovel Knight evokes
the feel of old-school 2D platforms like Super Mario Bros or Castlevania
but also adds its own unique twists.
This dissection is specific to Shovel Knight: Shovel of Hope, the original
game in the series (Figure 2.1). Sequels and spinoffs usually require their
own dissections, even if some aspects may be the same.

Figure 2.1 Shovel Knight screenshot.

Shovel Knight: Gameplay Dissection
Verbs
To understand a game, the best place to start is the verbs. What actions can
the player take?
Games are different from other forms of entertainment like books and
movies. The biggest difference is that in games, the player gets to do things.
The player can change what happens in the experience through their choices
and other actions. When you’re reading Hamlet (Shakespeare 1604), it’s
always going to end the same way, and Hamlet’s always going to drag his
feet to get there. When you’re playing a game of Go with a friend, you
don’t know who’s going to win or how they’re going to do it. That
combination of agency and uncertainty is what makes games fun. Games
are interactive.
So, when you’re trying to understand a game, start with questions about
interactivity. What does the player do? What actions can the player take?
There’s more to understand than just that, but it’s a good place to start.
In Shovel Knight, the player can move around and hit things with a
shovel. Movement is a combination of running and jumping. The core
gameplay is Run, Jump, and Attack. The player can complete 90% of the
game by just doing these three things. These are the core actions of this
game.
But how do we know that? Let’s dig a little deeper.

Advanced Verb-ing
One theme throughout this book is that game dissections depend on your
goals as a dissector. If you’re just trying to get a rough understanding of
Shovel Knight, understanding that the player’s actions are Run, Jump, and

Attack is enough. Stop there, move on. That’s a completely valid approach
and you can pat yourself on the back.
But sometimes you need to know more. If you’re going to start work on
the a 2d platformer team, or you’re going to make a game inspired by
Shovel Knight, or you’re writing a dissertation on it, you need to understand
player actions at a deeper level.
And sometimes the verbs may not be as obvious. If you’re not sure what
counts as a core action, you may need to spend a little more time analyzing
before you can say that with authority.
When you’re doing a deep analysis of a new game, it’s useful to start
with every verb you can think of. Go through the controller diagram. Think
about what you do when you play the game, especially the choices that you
deliberate over. Ask your friends “What do you do in this game?” Read the
wiki if there is one. Write it all down as a starting point.
Let’s do that for Shovel Knight:
Run
Run Right (right on the controller while on the ground)
Run Left (left on the controller while on the ground)
Attack (press the attack button, officially called “Dig Slash”)
Jump (jump button while on the ground)
Jump Right (jump button while moving right)
Jump Left (jump button while moving left)
Fall (what happens after you jump or are in the air for another reason)
Air Control (moving right/left while in the air)
Drop Attack (a combination of falling and attacking triggered by
pressing down while in the air, officially called “Shovel Drop”)
Dodge (move or jump to avoid an enemy or other hazard)

Fight (move and attack against an enemy, with a combination of
different actions mixed together)
Boss Fight (fight, but with more complicated things going on)
Wait (don’t do anything, sometimes important to get timing right)
Dig (attack a pile of dirt to get things out of it)
Break (attack an object like a chest or wall to destroy it)
Loot (technically pulling things out of a chest is a different action than
breaking the chest open)
Juggle (hit something that is falling, which sends it up again)
Die (lose health or fall in a pit)
Talk (press up while near a Non-Player Character (NPC) to initiate
dialog)
Buy (choose a text option to spend money or otherwise acquire a
thing)
Fish (use an inventory item to try to get stuff)
Use Relic (use an inventory item at the cost of Magic, with about a
dozen different ones that can be acquired)
Drink (use an inventory item to gain a bonus)
Play Music (select music via a conversation with an NPC)
Charge Slash (a modified attack earned later in the game)
Uncover (sometimes when you destroy something, there is another
object or enemy behind it that enters the scene)
Mini-Game (there are places where you can play little sub-games with
different goals)
Explore (look around and move around to find something new)
Find (basically the same as Explore, but possibly referring to a specific
thing you were looking for)

Gather (pick up coins or other things, which happens naturally when
the character touches them)
Collect (usually used to mean the same thing as Gather but can also
refer to Feats or other more abstract things)
Plan (connect a series of actions in your mind and think about using
them together, possibly with specific timing)
Position (place yourself in the right place)
Observe (watch how the objects in the world work)
Learn (uncover the systems of the game and how they work)
Predict (use what you’ve learned to come up with a theory about what
will happen next)
Watch (cut scenes)
Travel (move on the map view that is used to select level)
Showdown (a separate play mode that I’m ignoring for this dissection)
Challenge Mode (another separate play mode)
New Game (UI action to start a game)
Enter Name (UI action to label a game save)
Body Swap (change avatar appearance)
You can see how this list can get pretty long. Let’s talk about how to turn
this big list into a smaller list that is more useful.
To start, let’s analyze these words. Which verbs relate to each other?
Which do you think of together when you’re playing?

Pre-Verbs
If you’re dissecting an idea for a new game you’re thinking about, you won’t have a controller
diagram to get you started. Instead, you need to identify the verbs based on the information you
do have.
When you’re describing the idea to people, what actions do you talk about?
When you play the game in your head, what is it that you’re doing?
Picture the game on a controller. What would the buttons do?
This might be hard. The inspiration for a game idea can start with a story or a cool new feature
or other things. But if you find that your game idea doesn’t have clear verbs, that’s a sign that
your idea isn’t really complete yet.
Understanding the core loop is a key part of early ideation. You can’t pitch a game if you
can’t describe what the player is going to actually do in that game. If this happens, you need to
spend some more time thinking this through before moving on.

Direct Action Verbs
Since we’re trying to understand interactivity, we want to focus on verbs
that are about the player directly doing something. Look for verbs where the
player does something that sends input to the computer – this can be
pressing a button, pushing on a stick, touching a touchpad, or anything else.
When the player does this, the game responds. The game rules recognize
the player’s action as something important, and something in the game’s
model of the world changes (Figure 2.2). These are key to interactivity.

Figure 2.2 Flow chart showing how the player does something,
foreshadowing bigger flow charts coming up soon.
Once we identify things the player can do, we can look for verbs that all
relate to the same type of action. Any player actions that result in the same
response from the game can be grouped together. That’s what we’re looking
for.
Looking over the big list, we can group a bunch of movement-related
verbs together. All of these are used by the player to change the position of
their avatar character.
Run
Run Right (right on the controller while on the ground)
Run Left (left on the controller while on the ground)
Jump (jump button while on the ground)
Jump Right (jump button while moving right)
Jump Left (jump button while moving left)
Air Control (moving right/left while in the air)
The important thing here is to recognize that the player controls an avatar in
a 2D space by changing the avatar’s position (and orientation) in the world.
There are a lot of different movement controls with slight nuanced
differences. The diversity of specific movement controls is a good sign that
navigating through the world is important in this game.
Each of these is important to understand if you’re really trying to dig
deep on how Shovel Knight works. Doubly so for other games with more
complex controls to navigate more complex 3D scenes. But for right now,
we can group them all together as “Move”. We’ll talk about more ways to
differentiate these types of overlapping verbs later.

Deeper Dives: Research
When I start working on a game that fits into an existing genre or has a clear relationship with
another game, it’s important to start by doing a deep analysis of that related game.
Play the game thoroughly yourself and reflect on the experience.
Play related games.
Watch other people play the game. Social media can be great for this.
If it happens to be a game with an active fandom, read up on what they think. Try to build
the knowledge that a fan would have. There will always be fans with deeper knowledge
than you – some fans are great with details – and that’s OK.

The next set of verbs is combat related:
Attack (press the attack button, officially called “Dig Slash”)
Drop Attack (a combination of falling and attacking triggered by
pressing down while in the air, officially called “Shovel Drop”)
Charge Slash (a modified attack earned later in the game)
Dodge (move or jump to avoid an enemy or other hazard)
Fight (move and attack against an enemy, with a combination of
different actions mixed together)
Boss Fight (fight, but with more complicated things going on)
There are lots of ways to inflict damage on enemies. The player provides an
input and then the game rules decide if an enemy takes damage and how
much. I think we can comfortably group these verbs together and talk about
“Attack” as one of the big concepts in Shovel Knight.
The final set of direct player actions are all object-related. The player has
an inventory of special actions they can take (by pressing up and attack).
There are about a dozen different Relics the player can acquire over the
course of the game with various different effects, ranging from healing to

attacks to earning money. Most of these deplete the player’s Magic stat
when used.
Use Relic (use an inventory item at the cost of Magic, with about a
dozen different ones that can be acquired)

Indirect Action Verbs
Action Verbs that describe what the player can do are the most important
for understanding the core of a game, but there are a variety of other verbs
that happen during a game that are important to understand.
Die (lose health or fall in a pit)
Gather (pick up coins or other things, which happens naturally when
the character touches them)
Collect (usually used to mean the same thing as Gather, but can also
refer to Feats or other more abstract things)
Uncover (sometimes when you destroy something, there is another
object or enemy behind it that enters the scene)
There are verbs that happen in the game but are not directly triggered by the
player. These are more of a consequence of a player action than the action
itself. The player never presses “Collect” in Shovel Knight – they just walk
over to an object and if it’s the right type of object, like a gem, it just gets
collected. The player might do that intentionally, but the “do” the player
does is just movement.
There are also object actions the player can take based on the items in the
world around them. These use the existing controls but change the results
based on the objects in the world when the player performs their action.
These are important to understand but are less core than the actions.

Talk (press up while near an NPC to initiate dialog)
Fall (what happens after you jump or are in the air for another reason)
Dig (attack a pile of dirt to get things out of it)
Break (attack an object like a chest or wall to destroy it)
Juggle (hit something that you’ve previously hit to keep it in the air)
Buy (choose a text option to spend money or otherwise acquire a
thing)
Play Music (select music via a conversation with an NPC)
Loot (technically pulling things out of a chest is a different action than
breaking the chest open)
The most common type of object interaction is talking with NPCs. I know
it’s a bit rude to call NPCs objects, but from the perspective of the code
there’s not much difference.
Technically you could call combat an indirect action because it only
makes sense if there’s an enemy nearby and there isn’t always an enemy
nearby. This is a clever point, but given the frequency of enemies in the
level design, I think it’s fair to call “Attack” a core gameplay action. If
someone re-made Shovel Knight with significantly fewer enemies and more
depth to the NPC interactions, it would be an interesting way to make an
entirely different game in a different genre without changing the core
engine or code or player actions of Shovel Knight. But it wouldn’t be Shovel
Knight. More on content and how it changes the game in a later chapter.

Abstract Verbs
Dodge (move or jump to avoid an enemy or other hazards)
Explore (find something new)

Find (basically the same as Explore, but possibly referring to a specific
thing you were looking for)
Plan (connect a series of actions in your mind and think about using
them together, possibly with specific timing)
Position (place yourself in the right place)
Observe (watch how the objects in the world work)
Learn (uncover the systems of the game and how they work)
Predict (use what you’ve learned to come up with a theory about what
will happen next)
Mini-Game (there are places where you can play little sub-games with
different goals)
There are a number of potential verbs we identified that aren’t things the
player can do. These are things the player thinks about when doing other
things – these are why the player does things, not what the player does. So,
these are important to consider, but I would categorize these as goals, not
actions. These are incredibly important to understand and are fundamental
to understanding the core game loop, but I’d put them in a different
category than direct player actions, and we’ll cover them in a later chapter.

Interface Verbs
Watch (cut scenes)
Travel (move on the map view that is used to select level)
Showdown (a separate play mode that I’m mostly ignoring for this
dissection)
Challenge Mode (another separate play mode)
New Game (UI action to start a game)
Enter Name (UI action to label a game save)

Body Swap (change avatar appearance)
There are a number of actions that the player takes entirely in the UI (User
Interface), outside of core gameplay. In a game like Shovel Knight, it’s easy
to distinguish when the player is controlling an avatar (Shovel Knight) in
the game world versus when the player is selecting words in a menu. The
UI is something outside the illusion of the game, which is necessary but not
part of the fun. If you’re working on designing the UI, definitely think these
through and consider all the options. But for this game, they are not core
gameplay.

Deeper Dives: Frame by Frame
For fast-paced games, one technique I find very useful is to record a short video of the core
gameplay, then step through the video frame by frame. Watch closely, and you’ll see lots of little
things that the developer does to make things work. Visual effects that communicate important
information to the player, little tricks of physics to make things flow better, and complex camera
behaviors so the player’s attention is on the right things. These are great when you need to know
everything about a game. But most of this chapter is for when you’re just starting to understand
a game.

Games as Input/Output
To help understand why these different types of verbs are different, let’s talk
about how games work. As with most things, games can be understood in a
lot of ways. This is one of those ways.
When a player plays a video game, they are participating in an exchange
with a computer. The player provides inputs through a device of some sort –
a game controller, a keyboard, a touch screen – and the computer processes
that inputs and then provides an output for the player – pixels on a screen.
The computer uses a set of rules and logic and code to determine how the
player’s input changes the pixels. The rules and logic and code are what the

game designer controls. That is what we call the game. But everything else
is important to understand as it creates the full experience.
This can be represented in a diagram like Figure 2.3.

Figure 2.3 Input Output.
The left side of this image represents the player. What they see, what they
think, what they do. The right side of this image represents the computer.
All the electrical impulses tickle the microchips based on the code of the
game.
Let’s step through a simple single-game action based on this model. The
player is enjoying a pleasant time in Shovel Knight (Figure 2.4). They
notice some gems above and to the left, so they decide to jump to gather
them.

Figure 2.4 Shovel Knight game screen showing the moment
before the player makes a decision.
We start by noting that the player has made a decision (Figure 2.5). This
is how things start in games – things happen in the player’s brain. The root
of all gameplay is imagination.

Figure 2.5 I want to jump.

In order for the game to do anything, this thought needs to get from the
player’s brain to the computer (Figure 2.6). There are all sorts of useful
input devices designed to make this happen. The nature of the input device
has a large impact on the player’s experience, and new types of input
devices like the iPhone’s touch screen or the Wii’s motion controller can
lead to huge changes in the video game industry.

Figure 2.6 Press the button.
For our current discussion, it doesn’t really matter what input device is
being used. The important thing is that the player presses a button on the PC
or game controller that indicates that the player wants the character (Shovel
Knight) to jump.
This information then flows into the computer (Figure 2.7). A series of
electrical impulses flow from the controller through a wire into the
computer, where chips translate the signals into the code.

Figure 2.7 Electrons flow.
The code then processes the new information (Figure 2.8). The code
knows that this sequence of electrical impulses means that this button was
pressed. And this button means jumping. And jumping means many things:
The position of the avatar character changes, moving them upward.
Most games have a physics engine that controls positions and motion,
so this is done by adding a force in a direction to the character and
letting the physics logic compute the exact change in position.
Because of the physics engine, gravity starts operating on the
character, changing their motion over time.
The character’s animation changes from a standing animation to a
jumping animation.
This changes the character’s state – the character is now in the air.
Now different inputs and outputs are possible. If the player presses
down now, the character will go into a downward attack state, as
defined by the game rules written into the code. Pressing the jump
button again won’t do anything.

And all of this needs to be reflected in the pixels on the screen.

Figure 2.8 Character enters jump state.
This last point is important. The state changes in the code only matter if
the player can understand them. Most video games can only communicate
their internal changes through a screen. Any change to the internal state and
logic of the game needs to be expressed in pixels so the player can process
it (Figure 2.9). Setting up the right pixels is a combination of game art to
reflect changes in the game world and UI/UX design to reflect changes in
the data presented by the game. Both are important and ideally both work
together to produce the best result.

Figure 2.9 Pixels change.
The player has their own complex system of input devices that they use
to process incoming information – eyes, ears, noses, etc. Good games will
reinforce their messages using as many senses as possible (Figure 2.10).
Starting with visual, often using audio, and occasionally adding some
vibration so the player can feel what is happening. Smell and taste don’t
come up as often, but I’m sure smell-o-vision will be everywhere in a few
years.

Figure 2.10 Player notices change.
And then the cycle begins anew. Once the player processes this new
information, they want new things (Figure 2.11). For example, that frog
might be a problem, so the player may need to change their direction or
enter an attack state to avoid taking damage (Figure 2.12). The full game
experience is a long sequence of very quick input/output cycles that add up
to create something greater than each part.

Figure 2.11 Player wants new thing.

Figure 2.12 Screenshot of Shovel Knight, showing a jump has
begun.

Verbed Input/Output
This Input/Output flow gives us a way to understand the differences in
different types of verbs. Each verb operates on a specific step of the
diagram as seen in Figure 2.13.

Figure 2.13 Input verbs and output goals.
The Direct Action verbs are controller inputs delivered by the player.
The Indirect Action verbs are things that happen in the computer based
on the player actions.
The Abstract verbs are going on in the player’s head, helping them
plan out their next action but not happening as a direct result of a
controller input.
Interface verbs affect things the player sees in the Game Display that
are not part of the game world.
This helps explain why the Direct Action verbs are the most important for
an initial understanding of the game. They are the simplest and most clear
actions that shape the range of options for everything else. They are where
the player that exists in the real world interacts with the game. The game
rules only decide to break things after the player uses the attack action. And
the player’s desires are similarly shaped by the range of inputs the game
allows. The player may want to build a bridge or get a drink at the bar but
without a related button that desire is going to go unfulfilled.

The actions the player can take shape everything about the game. So,
start there if you want to understand the game.

Understanding Verbs
Verbs are just the first step.
If Shovel Knight is about Moving and Attacking, so is Halo (2001). So is
Super Mario Bros (1985). So is God of War (2005). But these are all very
different games.
The second step in a game dissection is to understand the nature of the
verbs and how they fit together. We’ll talk more about systems later, but the
core ideas of systems thinking is that the relationships between things (in
this case verbs) can be as complex and interesting as the things themselves.
So, let’s start with our two core verbs.

Overlapping Verbs with Different Rules
So, we’ve broken Shovel Knight into the Core Verbs of “Move” and
“Attack” but want to understand more about them.
Going back to our definition of games in the first chapter can help. We’ve
already covered Interactivity – the choices and skills that make up the Big
Verbs. Next on the list is Rules.
So, our Verbs are what the player can do. The Rules are how the game
responds to those prompts from the player (Figure 2.14). “When the player
does X, the game does Y”

Figure 2.14 Outputs.
In a board game, these are written out explicitly. “When you pass GO,
collect $200”. A core verb in Monopoly (1935) is move, so “pass GO” is
something that can happen naturally as a result of the player’s action.
The same sort of thing happens in a video game like Shovel Knight.
When you touch an enemy, you lose health. When you walk over a health
pack, there are fewer health packs in the level and you have more health.
The player does something, and the game responds.
Moving in Shovel Knight is about position, and position interacts with a
lot of game rules.
Where you are relative to an enemy determines whether or not you get
hit by an enemy attack.
Where you are and where you’re pointing determines if your attack
hits the enemy when you trigger an attack.
Where you are determines when you pick up gems, powerups, or other
items.
Where you are determines what you can see – the game only shows
you one screen at a time, based on player position.

Where you are triggers progression through levels, including triggering
cut scenes that advance the story.
This is similar in a 3D first-person shooter but with some important
differences:
Where you are determines whether or not you get hit by an enemy
attack.
Where you are and where you’re pointing determines if your attack
hits the enemy.
Where you are determines when you pick up ammo, weapons,
powerups, or other items.
Where you are and where you’re pointing determines what you can
see, using a first-person perspective.
Where you are triggers progression through levels, including triggering
cut scenes that advance the story.
So, one way you can differentiate similar verbs is by looking at the rules
and consequences of those verbs. When there are mechanic differences,
those are indicators that the verbs may sound the same but are functionally
very different.

Overlapping Verbs with Different Goals
Looking at how verbs interact with rules is helpful. The processes going on
in the computer can change how the verbs work. But the processes going on
in the player’s head are even more important.
Why does the player use verbs?
Verbs are used to achieve goals.

Verbs only mean something in the context of the player’s goals.
What are the player’s goals in Shovel Knight? Let’s do a quick brainstorm
like we did for verbs.
Rescue Shield Knight.
Help the characters you meet.
Defeat enemies.
Reach the end of the level.
Trigger the next cut scene.
Unlock new areas.
Get to the end of the game.
Don’t die.
Some of these (“Rescue Shield Knight” and “Help the characters you
meet”) are story, not gameplay. Story is an important part of most games,
but when we’re still assembling a core loop, it’s not the most important
thing to understand. Story motivates players to complete the game, it
doesn’t motivate the players’ actions from moment to moment. At least for
a game like this – some games like Baldur’s Gate (1998) or Life Is Strange
(2015) make story a key part of every level of gameplay. But a game like
Shovel Knight does not weave the story into every moment of gameplay
like this.
The goals that are woven into every moment of gameplay are the ones
like “Defeat enemies” or “Reach the end of the level” that guide player
actions in every moment. This is what the player is trying to do during
gameplay, and this is why the player engages with the verbs of the game.
The player attacks to defeat enemies and moves to reach the end of the
level.

The next few goals (“Trigger the next cut scene”, “Unlock new areas”,
and “Get to the end of the game”) are just “Beat the level” phrased slightly
differently. When you’re considering goals or verbs, keep an eye out for
overlapping terms like this.
The final objective “Don’t die” isn’t really a goal per se but is more of a
fail case. If the player dies, they have to reset a little ways back. Death
never stops you from progressing, but it can definitely slow you down.

Verb to the Goal
So how does the player turn “Move” and “Attack” into completed levels?
They move through the level to find a route that gets to the next area while
avoiding or attacking any threats. Most areas have a little challenge or
puzzle to advance. Some areas require jumping over pits. Some require
jumping off objects to get up high. Each area has a different combination of
challenges that makes it interesting and different. More on that later.

Big Verbs
OK, so we’ve defined the big verbs in Shovel Knight as Move and Attack.
That feels right. When I play the game, I spend most of my time doing
those things. And thinking about those two things and how to do them
better.
If you want to understand a game, understand the things the player
spends most of their time doing. Sometimes there are other features that are
splashy and interesting and become the focus of the marketing and
discussion around the game. But a game designer needs to think about the
thing the player is actually investing their time on.

You can see this in lots of different types of games. Platformers spend a
lot of time perfecting their jumping and running. In an open world game,
you spend most of your time moving from place to place. The open world
games that succeed are the ones that this travel fun and engaging.

Verb as Genre
As we’ll see in future chapters, verbs are a good way to differentiate and organize games. All
first-person shooters start with move and attack. Platformers like Mario focus heavily on move,
with varying amounts of attack depending on the platformer.
But a game like SimCity doesn’t have move as a verb at all – the primary verb there is build.
This makes sense – I think most people would agree that platformers have more overlap with
shooters than with builders.
This can be useful to know. If you’re looking for inspiration on your city builder, it might not
be best to start by playing some Halo. Maybe find a puzzle game like Triple Town that shares
“Build” as a verb to see how it’s done differently there.

More to Come
We’re going to stop our Shovel Knight gameplay analysis here. I know
we’ve barely scratched the surface of Shovel Knight and platformers in
general. But we’re building foundations here. It’ll get crazier in later
chapters.
The last part of this analysis pulls some ideas from future chapters, but I
like showing a version of the same diagram for each game, so forgive me
for the spoilers. This diagram represents each game as a formula. The
player has verbs they can use to reach goals but are blocked by challenges.
Figure 2.15 shows the simplest level of detail, breaking each step into a
single element. Figure 2.16 is a bit more useful in that it breaks each of
these categories into multiple entries, showing the different actions and
challenges of the game:

Figure 2.15 Shovel Knight flow diagram showing Verbs,
Challenges, and Goals.

Figure 2.16 Shovel Knight flow diagram with more boxes.
Each level is a package of these different pieces, as shown in Figure 2.17.
In Shovel Knight, most of the variation comes from changing out the
challenges, but other games can handle this differently.

Figure 2.17 Shovel Knight flow as a level.
Multiple levels can be added together to represent the full flow of the
game, as players work on larger goals and larger challenges. See Figure
2.18.

Figure 2.18 Shovel Knight flow from level to level.
We’ll dig into these ideas in more detail in later chapters, but before we
leave Shovel Knight, let’s talk about other things that influence gameplay.

Shovel Knight: Non-Gameplay Dissection
When dissecting, it’s not just about gameplay. Even for a game designer.
If you want to understand the gameplay of a game, you have to
understand everything about it. How do the non-gameplay aspects of the
game tie into the gameplay? Where did the gameplay ideas come from?
What led to the gameplay decisions you see in the game? The game itself
makes much more sense if you understand the context that led to those
decisions.
To be clear, I did not work on (most of) the games I talk about in this
book. I do not know how decisions were made by the teams that did. We’re
talking about these things as an outsider, piecing things together from what
we can see in the game and generally available knowledge. I’m sure there
are interesting stories there, and I encourage those who were present to
write them down so I can read those books. I love to know authorial intent,
but unless that’s you, the rest of us are left with the work itself. And there’s
plenty to see there.

Senses
Gameplay is influenced by the look and feel of the game.
Shovel Knight has a very clear and distinct style. It’s a retro game trying
to emulate the feel and visuals and sounds and complete experience of a
classic platformer. In this sense, the style fits very clearly with the
gameplay. People who are familiar with the references will expect the
gameplay and style to both align with their perception of those earlier
games. And people who don’t know the classics will still understand that
both gameplay and style evoke an earlier age, so don’t expect integrated AI
and vast open worlds and high-fidelity graphics.

The simplicity of the game also makes it easy to see where gameplay and
graphics intersect. Remember our input/output diagram – the output part of
the diagram is made up of pixels on a screen that the computer manipulates.
This is the player’s only source of information on what is going on in the
game (well, that plus sound and sometimes vibration). As a game designer,
these pixels are all you have to get your ideas across to the player. A player
who might not really be paying attention and who most likely hasn’t played
every previous game that you (the game designer) did. This is a difficult
and momentous responsibility for a few measly pixels.
Every game has to create a visual vocabulary of what matters to the
player and to gameplay – using the same size, shape, color, or whatever
consistently helps the player learn what to do and then quickly process new
scenes. Shovel Knight does a great job of quickly establishing what the
player needs to know and sticks with that throughout the game:
The ground you walk on is flat – usually rectangles – and high contrast
against the rest of the background.
Objects you can interact with are also high contrast and often include
movement. The game intentionally doesn’t create separate
vocabularies for enemies and rewards, as it wants to play with that in
the gameplay. Sometimes bouncing on an enemy’s head is the only
way to reach a reward. Sometimes a reward is in a dangerous place
making it more of a problem than a pure benefit.
Combat actions and results are always clearly punctuated. Enemies
don’t just disappear – they vanish in a little cloud of smoke. If the
player missed the frame where they died, the game is still
communicating for a few frames after.
Shovel Knight’s shovel provides a nice strong indicator of where the
character is facing. This is especially handy for communicating the

difference between “falling” and “falling with intent to kill”. The
downward shovel attack is important and might not be noticed without
the big bright object that moves around the character.

History and Influences
I’m a big fan of stealing ideas from other games. No game is an island.
Every game is inspired by the ideas and execution of games (and other
things) that came before.
There’s an important distinction to be made here. All games are inspired.
All games borrow and “steal”. But when you draw inspiration from
something, you need to be careful to not draw too heavily. If your game is
just a copy of someone else’s idea, that’s actual stealing, not the tongue-incheek way I sometimes use the term. If your game gets all its features and
ideas from another game and doesn’t add or change them in a way to make
something new, then you need to rethink and start over to add your own
twist on the thing.
You can see this in Shovel Knight. Shovel Knight is a wonderful and
unique game. But almost every aspect of Shovel Knight comes from
somewhere else.
Super Mario Bros (1985) is generally credited with popularizing the
2D side-scrolling platformer genre.
But many of the ideas from Super Mario Bros were first developed in
the Mario Bros (1983) arcade game, and borrowed from earlier games
like Space Panic (1980).
Many 2D side-scrollers after Mario added attacks like Shovel Knight’s
shovel, including popular games like Metroid (1986) and Castlevania
(1986).

Once the seeds of the genre had been planted there are many great
games that took those ideas and adapted them for PC gaming,
including Lode Runner (1983), Commander Keen (1990), and Cave
Story (2004).
Braid (2008) and Spelunky (2008) popularized the idea of using 2D
platformers as a simple and nostalgic base to experiment with
interesting indie game ideas.
As a game designer, it’s important to know the history of not just the games
but also the features. Jumping from platform to platform in Shovel Knight is
interesting but is informed by many other games before, and feeds into
many other games after. Dissecting each of those games, at least in terms of
that specific feature, helps you see how to use that feature in your own
games. Johnnemann Nordhagen took this idea even further and built a game
that collects all the different ways that a specific mechanic has been
executed over the years. Museum of Mechanics: Lockpicking (Dim Bulb
Games, 2022) is an interesting way to see how games borrow and share and
innovate on specific ideas.

Monetization
How a game makes money has a huge effect on the design of the game.
There are a few major trends in monetization that had huge impacts on
the types of games we associate with each era:
1. Arcade games. Monetization is quarter-based. (Technically
monetization for the developer is by selling arcade cabinets, but the
cabinet buyers were very interested in quarter throughput, so the
developers developed to that metric.) The goal was to get the player to
notice the game in a crowded arcade, and then plug in as many

quarters as possible in as little time as possible. This led to game with
very quick session lengths, very steep difficulty curves, and little to no
thought about ongoing long-term play.
2. Console games. Monetization is based on selling boxes in stores, with
no internet to provide updates or live services after that. At first early
consoles tried to mimic games that players knew from the arcade, but
soon the focus became value. Games were reviewed based on hours of
play. Look at the difference between Mario Bros and Super Mario
Bros to see a clear example of this change.
3. Mobile games. Monetization is based on downloads and (after the first
few years) in-app purchases. The goal is to get a player in quickly and
easily, then keep them around for long enough that they get
comfortable spending money. The growth of big data plays a big part
here, as game developers start to analyze what actually gets people to
stick around and spend money. Game sessions are short, but players
are expected to stick around for months or years.
This is not an exhaustive list by any means. Early PC games resembled
console games but with a lot of their own twists. Console has been
changing with the growth of downloadable upgrades. Most of this doesn’t
apply to educational games or other games for change, which have entirely
separate monetization goals and pathways. Each game’s monetization needs
to be analyzed separately but with an understanding of how it fits into the
standard monetization schemes of its time.
Shovel Knight makes most of its money through downloads on PC game
services like Steam. This is currently the dominant sales platform on PC,
and the growth of independent routes to sell and market games without
interacting with big publishers and retailers is a big part of why indie games
like Shovel Knight exist and succeed. A successful Steam game can support

a small indie team with a good idea, but console games generally have to be
bigger.
Shovel Knight started out on Kickstarter, raising money for the initial
development through crowdfunding. Kickstarter and similar platforms are a
popular way for smaller indie games to generate some initial funds and
market an early idea. The initial money helps, but the initial fan base is as
or more important to making a small game with a small (or zero) marketing
budget a success.
Since its release, Shovel Knight has shipped multiple downloadable
content (DLC) packs, which have later been released as separate games.
Shovel Knight has become a series with explorations in multiple genres and
different playstyles.
Selling as a single purchase drives Shovel Knight to focus on providing a
complete package. Deeper progression and varied content make the single
purchase feel worth it, generating good word-of-mouth to keep the game
selling.

Narrative
Story and gameplay are friends. They work together to bring joy and
happiness to players. Different games make more or less use of this
friendship. Shovel Knight is a great example of the most common use of
story in games.
In Shovel Knight, the main use of story is to provide emotional context
for the player’s progression and emotional punctuation at key points. The
game establishes early on that Shovel Knight is trying to rescue their friend
Shield Knight. A classic rescue mission, which is a great way to make a
player want to reach the end. My friend needs help!

Most of the time, this is just a small piece of background motivation.
During gameplay, the game doesn’t make reference to Shield Knight or
anything else about the characters. Bosses get a quick intro to establish their
character, during which the player has no input. The game stops to tell the
story. Then after a big level, there is a short dream sequence that reminds
the player of this long-term goal and provides some interactive rewards as
well. Some of the NPCs provide additional narration and backstory, but it’s
all contained in a few sentences so it never gets too involved or deep.
This is great. This is exactly what most games want. Story is there.
Emotions are triggered. The player knows why they’re doing all this, and if
the player puts the game down for too long, they feel a little guilty. Poor
Shield Knight. The story is fun and interesting, and the game is stronger
because of it.
Some games use story in deeper and more complicated ways. And I love
those games, too. But I’ve made some of them so I know how complicated
and difficult it can be to interweave story and gameplay in ways that
actually matter. More on that later.

Emotions
Story is one source of emotions, but games can evoke many emotions.
For action games, the most common emotion is frustration, which might
sound like a problem, but it really isn’t. Talking about games for the last
few decades, I’ve noticed that there are many flavors of frustration. Some
are good, and some are bad. The main difference is how and where the
player has agency in the frustration.
Outside Frustration: If the player has no agency, then it’s outside
frustration. It can be annoying, but it’s less personal so thus less

impactful. I can get frustrated watching a communication problem
unfold in an episode of a sitcom, but I don’t feel it personally.
Uncontrolled Frustration: Once the player has control of the action,
the potential for emotional involvement is higher. Give me buttons to
press and now any failure is my fault. So, the worst case here is when
the player has input but no real control. If the player expects to have
control but loses due to reasons outside of their control, that can be
very frustrating. The game made a promise and then failed to deliver.
This is often the worst form of frustration and game designer should be
careful to avoid situations like this. If the player needs to fail
regardless of their actions, make it very clear that the game knows it’s
not the player’s fault.
Confused Frustration: If the player has agency that actually matters,
that’s going to reduce the negative impact of the frustration. But this is
only true if the player understands all that. If the player doesn’t
understand how their actions influence the outcome, they might as well
not have agency. This is where many games fall apart, especially for
more casual audiences. It’s very frustrating to press buttons and not
understand why they matter. And that understanding is entirely the
responsibility of the game designer. Remember, the player only knows
what comes through that tiny funnel of information they see on the
pixels on the screen. If they aren’t able to construct a full mental model
of the logic going on inside the computer, to expect, they’re going to
have some negative frustration. In many cases, the hard part of being a
game designer isn’t coming up with good ideas; it’s getting the player
to understand those good ideas.
Difficult Frustration: Agency that matters and makes sense is not
enough. The challenges also have to be fair. Banging your head against

an impossible challenge can be a positive type of frustration (cough
Elden Ring cough), but not for all players. Some players want more
manageable challenges and find extreme difficulty to be bad
frustration. But the inverse is also true – a player who enjoys mastering
a skill may consider a sequence of easy challenges to be frustrating in
a very different way. Finding the right balance for the audience of your
game can be difficult – more on that later.
Fun Frustration: Finally, in some cases, players have agency,
understand the consequences of their actions, and still fail. This is
called gameplay. If the player understands why they failed, the
frustration from the failure is much less. In the best cases, frustration is
a fuel that drives the player to come back and try again. Games are
built on iteration, both as a development practice and as a player
strategy. A good game will create positive feelings of frustration that
guide the player to an emotional response along the lines of “I can do
better”. Which is a great lesson to learn for life, even outside of the
magic circle.

Meaning
I think it’s important to understand what games mean. Since games are a
relatively new form of art, we don’t always think of them as having an
impact on the world. But they do. The person who starts playing a game is
different from the person after the game is done. Games make people think
about things. Games change the world.
For many games, this is not the primary goal of the game. It might be
money. It might be providing a simple fun time. But meaning happens
whether the creator intends it or not. I understand programming better
because I played Robo-Rally. Some of my love of creativity and creative

problem-solving comes from early Infocom text adventures. Minecraft has
made a generation of kids think differently about creation and resources and
exploration and problem-solving.
I don’t think any game has one discrete meaning. Even games with a
clear intended meaning will be interpreted differently by each player who
encounters it. So, when I talk about meaning in the games in this book, I
don’t intend to exclude other meanings. When we talk about this in class,
every semester has different answers and they’re all right.
For me, Shovel Knight is about persistence. It’s not the only game where
the main character is beaten down constantly and has to constantly get up,
but it’s a clear example of that style of play. I’m not the most skilled player,
so I tend to die a lot. But the only time I feel like I’m losing is when I put
the game away and give up on saving poor Shield Knight.
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 3
Candy Crush Saga / Goals
DOI: 10.1201/9781003346586-3

Candy Crush Saga
Candy Crush Saga is a great game.
Candy Crush Saga (Figure 3.1) is a mobile game released by King (now
part of Microsoft) in 2012. Since launch, it has consistently been one of the
most popular games on mobile, with hundreds of thousands of monthly
users Curry, D. (2024).

Figure 3.1 Candy Crush Saga screen.
I’ve never worked on Candy Crush Saga, but I did work on a competitor.
When I was at a studio called Zindagi, we designed a match-3 called Crazy
Cake Swap based on a similar puzzle game called Crazy Kitchen. The
studio got bought by Zynga and didn’t stay around for long after that, but I
know this genre better than I know most genres.

Candy Crush Saga – Gameplay Dissection
Verbs
To understand Candy Crush Saga, let’s start where we always do: verbs.
What can the player do in Candy Crush Saga?
In this case, it’s a simple answer: swap. The player can touch a candy in
the grid and then slide it to an adjacent candy. When the player does this,
the two candies swap positions. That is the entirety of the player’s active
contribution to the core loop (Figure 3.2). There are some interesting less
active things the player does while swapping, such as “Scan” and “Predict”,
but these aren’t the simple button actions, so we’ll save discussion of those
for later in this chapter.

Figure 3.2 Inputs.

The core loop continues from there, though (Figure 3.3). After the player
makes a swap, the game rules check to see if either candy creates a line of
three or more. If it doesn’t, the swap is canceled. If it does, the game
removes those candies, possibly with an extra effect if the line is four or
more candies. Then the remaining candies fall to fill the empty space, which
can possibly create new matches and cause a chain reaction as each match
creates new matches.

Figure 3.3 Outputs.
The player performs a simple action, and the game rules result in
complex outcomes. This is one of the strengths of video games – the
processing burden of the game can be placed on the computer’s shoulders.
The rules of Candy Crush would be much less fun as a board game where
the players have to move each candy by hand and figure out the outcome of
each new position.
Swapping and the reactions to that swap is the heart of Candy Crush
Saga, and the core loop of any match-3 game.
And for completeness, Candy Crush Saga also has a few special case
verbs:

1. Players can use powerups such as the lollipop to remove specific
candies or otherwise affect the grid outside of swap actions. Outside of
the tutorials that teach these interactions, they are never required to
complete a level, but they are always there for the player to use. But
they are a limited resource that can only be acquired as an occasional
reward or for money.
2. Late in the game, there are new board elements that include an
interactive choice by the player. For example, Candy Frogs let players
choose where to place them when they go off.
3. Secondary modes like events provide a choice of what to play and
sometimes have some basic decision-making in the event itself.
So outside of these caveats, the verb of Candy Crush Saga is “swap”.

Goals
The gameplay goal of Candy Crush Saga varies based on the level. All
goals revolve around clearing things off the board, but the nuances of
exactly what you’re trying to do can change:
1. Clear a certain number of candies.
2. Clear a certain number of candies of a particular type.
3. Clear a certain number of special objects, like cherries, by dropping
them to the bottom of the grid.
4. Remove a certain number of non-candy obstacles, such as jellies.
5. Etc.
More on this in a moment.

Challenge
The real variety in Candy Crush Saga (and most match-3 games) comes
from the randomness of the falling pieces and the variety of obstacles that
make reaching the goal difficult. Most levels have more than just candies on
the board – a large variety of different objects create additional challenges
and opportunities for the player. These range from simple inert objects that
are removed when matches are made near them (Frosting), to inert objects
that expand across the grid over time (Chocolate), to snakes that charge into
baskets after enough matches are made next to them (Candy Cobra). These
aren’t all dangerous – there are also advanced board elements that can be
useful, such as conveyor belts, or are almost purely beneficial, such as the
UFO that drops special candies.
These obstacles are key to Candy Crush Saga’s success. The basic
concepts of the match-3 genre existed before Candy Crush Saga.
Specifically, the concepts of the genre were solidified in Bejeweled (2001)
and Bejeweled Blitz (2009). Many of the core ideas were present in earlier
games like Shariki (1994). The core gameplay is very directly based on
previous games like Bejeweled. But those previous games used only a
single level – there were no obstacles and just one board. Candy Crush
Saga innovated by adding a variety of levels with different obstacles and a
different grid layout for each level. This gave the existing fun core
gameplay more variety and long-term appeal. Bejeweled was successful, but
Candy Crush Saga took that success to vast new heights by adding varied
challenges and a stronger sense of progression.
The sense of progression comes from the “Saga” in the title. One of the
big innovations of Candy Crush Saga was the Saga Map. It’s not just that
the player was given a variety of levels with different obstacles, it’s also
important that these levels were set up as a line – a path to a destination.

Once the player completes a level, they move on to the next one, heading
toward the end. The Saga Map organizes this progression in a simple line,
showing the player the next levels they’ll be playing. This came out when
social gaming was king, so the line also shows you where your friends are,
creating some social pressure to advance. But the key concept here is that
the player is always doing something new, and has a sense of progression
that makes them want to come back tomorrow and try again. Progression is
a great driver for players, in any form.
The basic flow of the game is simple – the player swaps to clear the
level, with various obstacles in the way. But the obstacles and goals change
in each level, as shown in Figure 3.4, making the simple flow work for a
long time.

Figure 3.4 Candy Crush Saga flow: Simple diagram showing
Actions, Challenges, and Goals, with lots of variation on the
Obstacles and Goals.

Candy Crush Saga – Non-Gameplay
Dissection
Technology
Candy Crush is a fairly simple game that relies on a vast network of
advanced technologies to work. This is one of the fun daily realities of the
world we live in. The rules of the game and the interactions the player
experiences are built on easy-to-understand combinations of simple shapes.
This is good game design and keeps the player engaged. But the rest of the
experience is built on touch screens and constant online communication and
vast behind-the-scenes databases that are way more powerful than the
technology that brought humans to the moon.
One thing that is important to think about as a game designer is how
these vast changes in the world of technology affect your game. New
technology comes along all the time, and some of it is a great fit for new
types of games. Sometimes there is a direct linkage between a new
technology and a new style of game, such as GPS-enabling Pokémon Go
(2016). Sometimes the changes are more subtle and need time and thought
to understand. It’s not obvious (except in retrospect) that improvements in
computer miniaturization and wireless communication would lead to
everyone having a powerful connected computer in their pocket at all times.
And even then, it’s less obvious that it would lead to people looking for
games that they can pick up and play at any time for very short play
sessions. Technology doesn’t only change what people can do with games,
it changes what they want to do and when they want to do it and for how
long. The changes to the rules of technology create changes to the dynamics
of how people interact with technology, but more on the word “dynamics”

in Chapter 4. These changes can be harder to predict but provide great value
for your game designs once you notice them.

Senses
Candy Crush Saga looks cartoony and childish. Everything is in bold,
bright colors. The candies are simple and iconic. The game is not subtle in
its communication; if it wants you to know something, it will shout it rather
than whisper it. At a glance, you might guess that this is a game for
children. But the majority of players are adults.
Clearly, this works for Candy Crush Saga. The game is immensely
successful, and there’s no reason to think that the bright cartoony style
holds it back. Various clones and imitators have tried to re-theme match-3
gameplay in darker, more adult styles and failed. Childish works for adults.
On one level, this could be pure nostalgia. Adults want a moment to relax
and escape from their everyday world, so something that evokes pleasant
childhood memories could be just the thing. The reason childish works
might be because adults want to feel like children.
On another level, childish might work because childish is good design.
Kids are not the only ones who like bold, bright colors. Iconic shapes are
easy to distinguish and help make gameplay easy to understand. Direct
clear communication is good for everyone, including adults who are trying
to just relax. The design principles that work for children also work for
adults. It’s not childish design, it’s just good design.
This is not to say that Candy Crush Saga is constructed in a childish way.
There is a lot of attention to detail and polish in Candy Crush Saga. When I
started working on match-3 games, one of the first things I did was spend a
week analyzing some of the top games, and some of the worst games. I
recorded a few levels of Candy Crush Saga and then literally watched the

recording frame by frame to see exactly how everything moved and all the
little tricks of presentation. It’s a very useful exercise if you’re trying to
understand polish and presentation. Make sure you do the same with some
less successful games to really see the differences.

Freeze Frame
Things I saw by watching every frame of Candy Crush Saga:
Be really careful with motion. Humans know how falling looks and expect things to
accelerate and decelerate in certain ways. Falling at a constant speed is easier to code but
looks weird.
You can cover up lots of things with explosions. Don’t bother with expensive
transformations if an explosion will feel just as good or better.
Squash and stretch. This is an animation term for changing the shape of an object to
emphasize an impact. It really works.
Anticipation. Building up to a reward is as important as paying off the reward. Adding a
few frames of buildup makes almost everything better.
Sequencing. Know the order of events and keep that holy. It’ll help players understand
what’s happening and it’ll keep your game logic and code understandable.
Compression. When you have lots of things that need to happen at once, you can break
the Sequencing rule and have things overlap a bit. But do it in a logical and constrained
way. Think through what the player needs to focus on, and do some hand-waving in other
places.

Emotion and Narrative
Candy Crush Saga is not a deeply emotional game. There is no complex
storyline to follow with deeply realized characters following narrative arcs
who the player grows to care about. There is a simple story that presents a
problem to solve, and then a few levels later congratulates you for solving
it. This is enough story to give you a reason to continue, but Candy Crush
Saga is not a game where the majority of players are advancing to find out
what happens next.

Candy Crush Saga does hit emotional notes through the gameplay.
Candy Crush Saga is a game of constant rewards. Whenever you do
anything in the game, something explodes and the game tells you how great
you are. This is maybe not the most emotionally deep reward system, and I
wouldn’t trust the game’s praise to evaluate my self-worth, but sometimes
it’s just nice to hear praise. Constant rewards can be emotionally soothing.
A working mom who is having a hard day and just wants to catch their
breath and relax doesn’t need a game that constantly tells them they’ve died
and need to start everything over. Candy Crush Saga does have fail states,
and it does apply a little bit of emotional pressure in those moments (mostly
to encourage the player to spend money), but that’s the exception, not the
rule. Most of the time, playing Candy Crush Saga is soaking in a warm bed
of reward and praise. Some games are here to give people what they want.

Money
How does Candy Crush Saga make money?
The other big innovation Candy Crush Saga added to the match-3 genre,
other than the level variety demonstrated in the “Saga” part of the title, is
the monetization model. Candy Crush Saga is free to download and to play.
All ten thousand plus levels are free to access. But the game constantly asks
you to spend money on other things. Powerups. Unlimited lives. Extra
turns. Special modes.
Free-to-play business models drive most of the sales in the games
industry these days. And they work. Most of the players in these games pay
nothing. A small percentage pay something. And an even smaller
percentage pay a lot. These are the “whales” – the large spenders who keep
everyone else afloat.

The morality of the free-to-play model is a hotly debated topic. There are
certainly companies trying to suck every penny out of their players, and
using some questionable approaches to do that. No one should be exploiting
gambling addictions or tricking children into spending their parent’s money
or promising things to players that will never materialize.
But most free-to-play games, such as Candy Crush Saga, are not that
bad. Every monetization model – arcade cabinets, CDs in boxes,
hypercasual ad-driven games – is trying to use human psychology to get
people to buy things. At some level, all marketing is manipulation. But that
doesn’t mean it has to be an entirely bad thing. Good marketing is
manipulating people to notice things that they want and will enjoy. And I
believe that most free-to-play games are actually providing a valuable
service to people. People need entertainment and games are generally a
good deal in the entertainment world. Free-to-play allows most people to
get their entertainment for free, with some advertisements as the cost. And
the people who want to spend more and can afford it fund the rest of the
players.
I’ve done interviews with whales. Most of them are very happy with their
purchases and would spend the money the same way again. They have
disposable income, and this is how they choose to use it. Rich people spend
money on much sillier things than mobile games. You can find people who
overspend or otherwise have a negative spending experience, but even
among whales most of the transactions are mutually beneficial.
Candy Crush Saga is a quality game. Spending some money to make the
experience better is not unreasonable. I’m personally a free-to-play player
(most of the time – I’ll spend a little money to support games I particularly
enjoy), but I understand why people would spend without being coerced.
The free-to-play model isn’t perfect, and if I could wave a magic wand and

let everyone play and make games and all be rich I would, but I believe that
free-to-play is only problematic when abused.

History
Mobile games are the core of the games industry these days. Console games
and PC games are still going strong, but in terms of dollars spent, mobile
games are bigger than everything else combined.
Mobile games took a while to get there, though. In the early days of the
mobile game market, there was a lot of experimentation and uncertainty. No
one knew what would succeed.
Some companies tried releasing console-quality games (Infinity Blade
(2010)) or literal ports of PC or console games (Return to Monkey
Island (2022, mobile 2023), Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas (2002,
mobile 2013), XCOM: Enemy Within (2013, mobile 2014)). Neither of
these approaches became dominant, but there were a few notable
successes, such as a little title called Minecraft (2009, mobile 2011).
Although even Minecraft dropped its price significantly compared to
other platforms.
Some games experimented with the novelty of touch screen inputs.
Games like Flight Control (2009) or Where’s My Water? (2011)
discovered new styles of game that wouldn’t work with a controller.
These generally did well and you can see new innovations come out
and succeed regularly. A lot of the modern innovation in this area is in
the hypercasual genre where innovative ideas are needed to grab
people’s attention (and then throw a lot of ads at them).
This was also the early days of the shift to digital distribution across
the industry. Games could now be services with new content flowing
to players as quickly as it could be approved by Apple. Pocket God

(2009) was an interesting experiment in this space, updating as quickly
as possible with big new features changing the very nature of the game
regularly. Games that play like Pocket God aren’t common these days,
but the model of constant meaningful updates has become very
common and remains successful, even on other platforms like Roblox
or for other games like Fortnite (2017).
Along with other changes, monetization was also uncertain. At first,
companies thought that mobile gamers would pay something close to
console price, or at least similar to the downloadable markets that were
developing on consoles and on Steam. But as companies experimented
with pricing, they found that lower prices worked. The increase in
sales offset the drop in price, so soon Angry Birds (2009) was the top
of the Grossing chart at the lowest possible price – 99 cents. Then
Apple added the option to sell things inside the game, and in-app
purchases were born. Immediately, games like Smurf Village (2010)
discovered that free was even more appealing to people than 99 cents.
The modern free-to-play model was born.
In this era, mobile games were also learning a lot from social games.
Facebook was a huge platform for games for a few years, before changes to
the advertising structure and success of mobile killed it. Social games
pioneered many of the free-to-play principles that later dominated the
mobile market.
Candy Crush Saga was originally a Facebook game. And before that, it
was originally a web game. King, the company that makes Candy Crush
Saga, has used an interesting method for testing out new titles. They
generally release lots of new games first on their web browser and see how
they perform there. The best-performing titles are considered for conversion
to other platforms. At the time, Facebook was considered the first step and

mobile was a new and experimental platform. So, Candy Crush Saga first
appeared as Candy Crush, a web game without the level variety that made
Candy Crush Saga so successful. The Saga idea first appeared in Bubble
Witch Saga and proved successful. When King brought their score attack
match-3 Candy Crush over to Facebook, they added similar Saga elements.
Candy Crush Saga did great on Facebook, so within a few months it was
brought over to mobile as well.
By the time Candy Crush Saga came to mobile (2012), the battle over
pricing was mostly done. The free-to-play models that had been pioneered
in Facebook were dominating on mobile. So, Candy Crush Saga launched
for free, with strong social elements. Many of those social elements have
faded to the background over the years as the industry has continued to
evolve and updates have changed Candy Crush Saga. Competing for high
scores against your friends, or for progress along the Saga, used to be
prominently displayed but now is more of an afterthought.
So, Candy Crush Saga came into the market at the right time with an
innovative take on both the gameplay of match-3 and the free-to-play
monetization model. The game was a hit from day one. King already knew
that it had a good chance, based on its success on other platforms, but
nothing is certain in this industry. In this case, it worked. Candy Crush Saga
was so successful it spawned multiple sequels, a line of merchandizing, and
even a short-lived network television game show. And it became my wife’s
favorite video game.

Meaning
What is Candy Crush Saga about? What does Candy Crush Saga say about
the world? How does playing Candy Crush Saga change how you see the
world?

To me, Candy Crush Saga is about the joy of unintended consequences.
The player makes a seemingly simple innocuous action, and suddenly the
screen is filled with colorful explosions and some guy with a deep voice is
calling out compliments. The player didn’t plan that out. The player didn’t
know exactly what was going to happen. But like many things in life, taking
that first step leads to all sorts of unknown things.
Candy Crush Saga is the type of game that doesn’t really challenge the
player. Sure, some levels are nearly impossible, but those levels generally
require luck to complete along with skill. Mostly Candy Crush Saga is a
warm bath of compliments and pleasant explosions. And I believe these
types of games make the world a better place. People need comfort. People
need more praise in their lives. If a game can help people be happy and get
through their lives, I support that. Since the dawn of time, humans have
sought escapism. That need is deep in the human psyche. Games are the
latest delivery method. I’m not going to fight against the human psyche. Let
people enjoy simple fun.

Goals
Verbs tend to work together. In Shovel Knight, I can move, and I can attack.
I’m generally more successful in the game when I combine these verbs. I
don’t move, pause, wait, then attack. I attack while I’m moving. I look
around while I’m moving. I don’t stop and pause; I’m constantly
performing all the actions at one time and that’s part of what makes these
games challenging and interesting. Not all players can manage the feats of
dexterity and rapid stimulus processing required to be successful at moveshovel when they all have to be done together.
The player’s goals can also work this way. When I’m moving to line up a
shot, I’m also considering how to best avoid the line of fire of another

enemy at the same time. Goals can be combined just like actions can be
combined (Figure 3.5). But goals are even more likely to be layered rather
than combined.

Figure 3.5 Two Verbs merging into a bigger verb.
Look at Candy Crush Saga. If you chose a random second of a player’s
session in Candy Crush Saga, the verb is likely to be “swap”. Maybe “look”
if you accept that as a valid verb. But the player’s goals are going to hit
many different layers of analysis:
1. Making a match
2. Having this match lead to a chain reaction or create a power gem
3. Having this match lead to a better board state when it’s done
4. Removing lots of gems
5. Making progress toward the goal of this level
6. Scoring points
7. Beating this level
8. Beating this level with three stars
9. Completing an event or challenge goal

10. Getting to the end of the level progression
11. Getting a better score than my friends
12. Relaxing
13. Helping the cute little puppet creature to complete its goal
14. Clearing the chocolate
15. Removing the blockers
16. A very large number of level-specific goal types that I could list but
then this chapter would become boring and repetitive and as a game
designer I try to avoid boring things
This is normal. In games as well as life, a single action rarely has a single
goal. Goals come in herds. Some with subtle nuanced distinctions, and
some coming from completely different directions. I want to beat the level.
I want to beat the level with three stars. I want to beat the level with a
higher score than my brother. These are expressions of the same base goal
but with different nuances. From a game design standpoint, these can be
merged into a larger goal: success in the level (Figure 3.6).

Figure 3.6 Two goals merging into a bigger goal.

The bigger differences between goals are often based on scale. I want this
action to clear lots of gems. I want to beat the whole level. I want to get to
the end of the game progression. I want the action I’m performing now to
make me successful now, soon, and in the future. This sort of layering of
goals is very important to game design. Game designers like to talk about
goals as onions – one goal is contained within the other goal (Figure 3.7).
Progress toward one smaller goal also progresses you toward a larger goal.

Figure 3.7 One goal inside another goal.
So, both goals progress based on the same player action, but the second
goal is bigger so it takes longer. Completing the first goal is a step toward
completing the second goal. When you complete the first goal, you still
have the second goal to keep you driving forward. At no point does the
player complete one goal and have nothing left to do. For a game designer,
a player with “nothing left to do” is a problem – they’re likely to leave the
game and go do something else. Layered goals fix this by keeping the
player motivated at all times.

In Candy Crush Saga, a player may say that their goal is to beat this
level. But to do that, they need to find and make matches. Once they
complete the small goal and make that match, they are (hopefully) closer to
their big goal of completing the level. But now they have to start another
loop of activity to find another match and complete that small goal again.
Only after a few dozen small goals is the large goal reached.
And once the large goal is reached, the player is taken back to the Saga
Map where they remember that the large goal is just a small step toward the
ultimate long-term goal of progressing to the next story bit or to beat a
friend or to reach “the end”.
So maybe goals aren’t onions. Maybe goals are garlic. One head of garlic
seems like a single unified thing but when you break into it, you find many
smaller versions inside (Figure 3.8).

Figure 3.8 Many goals inside another goal.
This is good psychology. Humans like to group things and draw lines
around them. Part of the fun of goals is getting to define a task and then
check it off your to-do list. Completing a goal is fun.

And to be clear, this isn’t a monetization trick. This is what makes the
game fun. “Engagement” is a key goal of free-to-play games, and it does
drive monetization. But it’s also a sign that players are having fun. In my
opinion, the best way to drive monetization is to make sure the player is
having fun and engagement is one way to identify when that’s happening.
This is why layers are great. If there is always something more to do, the
player is never looking at an empty checklist. When they complete one
check box and get that hit of serotonin, there are still more checkboxes to
do. Not just the next one, but one that’s halfway finished. Or even better,
one that’s just about to be finished. If you’re at 4% progress toward a goal,
there’s no pressure to stay in the game and complete it. But if you’re at
96%, then you might as well play one more level to finish it off. And then
when you do, there will be another goal at 97% waiting for you.
This is present in many games:
Civilization and other 4x strategy games are well-known for promoting
“one more turn” gameplay where there are many different layers of
goals that overlap in complex ways, ensuring there is always one more
thing to do.
Boss levels are another way to promote players’ desire to check off
boxes. The boss is the hardest part of the level, but it always shows up
when you’re already past 90% complete. The temptation to check off
that box is part of why boss levels are so motivating.
Role-playing games (RPGs) offer multiple forms of progression –
story quests, side quests, character stats, faction relationships, skill
points, equipment, etc. This ensures that whenever a player completes
a goal, there are more things to do.
You can see this in the evolution of Candy Crush Saga.

Match-3 games such as Bejeweled existed before Candy Crush Saga,
with very similar core gameplay loops, even down to the specific power
gem abilities. But when Candy Crush Saga came out, its sales and
engagement blew them all away. Candy Crush Saga succeeded in large part
because of the Saga goal structure. The Saga structure takes a fun core
gameplay loop that had been mastered in previous match-3 games (Figure
3.9) and adds another layer of goals on top of it. You still want to make
good matches and get a good score, but now there are two new layers.

Figure 3.9 Goals merge: Make match, Create combos, Gain
points.
In the time-battle-based style of games like Bejeweled, there’s no way to
“beat” a level. You can get a good score, but you can never check off a box
that says the level is done.
The Saga map gives a clearer sense of progress on an individual level.
You can “beat” that level, even if there’s always room to go back and
improve your score (Figure 3.10).

Figure 3.10 Same, but with a bigger circle around it: Beat level.
And once you beat a level, you’re taken back to that map and shown the
true goal – long-term progression. In Bejeweled, the end of a level may or
may not check a personal goal box depending on your final score. In Candy
Crush Saga, you’re usually checking at least one box and maybe more
(Figure 3.11). And you’re reminded of all the remaining boxes you can
check in the future. That’s much more emotionally compelling and drives
long-term retention in a great way.

Figure 3.11 Same, but with a bigger circle around it: Complete
game.

Other Goals
Looking at the list of goals, some are groups of related tasks (various ways
to evaluate a move), some are garlic cloves of related progression (move,
level, game), but some don’t fit either of these categories. Things like
“relax” or “help the puppet” suggest that there is a lot of room for other
types of goals.
Helping the puppet is an example of a narrative goal. The player is
motivated by emotional goals created by the game’s story, especially when
mixed with the motivation to progress a narrative forward. These are
powerful goals for humans, as storytelling and completion are deeply
woven into humanity. For many games, just this goal motivation is enough
to invest time and effort into a full story with (expensive) cinematics. Core
gameplay drives players forward, and progression keeps them wanting
more, but deep engagement requires some emotional investment.
Other goals like “relax” suggest that the player may have goals for
playing the game that are outside the structure of the game. The game
doesn’t directly have a relax button, and none of the explosions that occur
when candies match are directly designed to ensure player relaxation.
Relaxation is the reason the player comes to the game, not something the
game directly produces. When all the parts of the game are working
correctly, this goal will be the result. These sorts of goals are important to
look for and understand in your games. Just because they’re not entirely
driven by game features doesn’t mean that you as a game designer can’t
influence them. Understanding what your players want inside and outside
the game is critical.

Player-Generated Goals
One type of goal that doesn’t show up in the goal list is player-generated
goals. The list focuses on goals that the game creates and enforces, but
humans love to generate and track goals on their own. Every time you
generate a to-do list and mentally check off items as they’re completed,
you’re acting as your own game designer to structure and motivate daily
life. Players do this during games, too. In Candy Crush, players might strive
to clear a certain area or create a certain combo even if the game doesn’t
ask them to. This is good.
As a game designer, you can’t force players to make their own goals. But
you can create an environment where goals are easy to make and track and
enjoy. The more freedom the game gives the player to try divergent actions,
the more players are going to find them and enjoy them. Players like
interacting with everything in the game world, which is something most
game designs should encourage. Finding ways to give strong feedback
during these actions helps the player know that their actions matter and that
the game recognizes what they did. When I was working on Paperboy 64
(1999) (my first full game design), we made sure that almost everything
reacted when being hit by a newspaper. The player was only meant to target
a few specific things, but the world is much more fun and engaging if
everything reacts. And if a player wants to focus on throwing papers at dogs
to keep them away from cats, they can do that. They don’t earn points for it,
but the game still creates these little scenarios with emotional potential and
shows the player that their actions have consequences.
Player-generated goals are also an important driver for gameplay goals.
During early playtests, keep an eye out for things players try to do. Ask
players what their goal is. If players want to do something, the game should
recognize and reward it. In some cases, take those personal goals and make

them into gameplay goals. But if that’s not appropriate, take those personal
goals and acknowledge that they matter. Keep track of them in the design to
make sure they remain fun as the game changes and iterates. If possible,
track them and give the player a small thumbs up in-game when they
complete that goal, even if it’s unrelated to the main goal. Players like a pat
on the back, so give them as much feedback as you can to make that
happen.

Events
Since launch, Candy Crush Saga has been finding ways to push the player’s
ability to complete goals even further. One of the most successful features
in many free-to-play games is the event. For example, in Candy Crush
Saga, they might have a special race where the player is rewarded for
completing a certain number of levels before other players do. In the current
builds of Candy Crush Saga, some of these “events” have become
important enough to bake back into the main game progression cycle. They
started as special events that only appeared occasionally but now are just
something that happens naturally during play.
There are a lot of good psychological hooks built into limited-time
events.
Players love getting more things “for free”.
They encourage coming back soon, so you can complete the goal
before the event ends.
They feel special and often emphasize the unique never-before-seen
qualities of this event.
If the goals are set up right, they scratch competitive urges in a way
that doesn’t automatically advantage expert players.

In Candy Crush Saga, events are a great way to add an intermediate layer of
goals. Candy Crush Saga does a great job of providing immediate goals,
and the Saga Map provides a great long-term goal. But the long-term of the
Saga Map can be pretty far off, especially now that there are thousands and
thousands of levels. The motivation to reach the end of the map now takes
multiple years to complete. So, there’s a need for more checkboxes between
the “complete a level” box and the “beat the game” box.
Events provide a goal that is bigger than a single level but is still realistic
to actually complete. A player may never reach level 20,000, but they can
earn the free powerup by collecting a few more levels to win the race. It
doesn’t even matter if they want a free powerup – it will still motivate them
to push forward just to check the box. Humans are weird that way.
Being able to see this in retrospect is a sign of a reasonably skilled
designer. But the real trick is identifying this before the feature is
implemented. A really talented game designer would be able to look at
Candy Crush Saga at launch and identify the goal layers. A really really
talented game designer would be able to do that, and then notice that the
goal layers are fairly far apart. Even with only 80 levels, the motivation to
complete a level and the motivation to complete the game have a big gap.
And it takes a really really really talented game designer to do all that, and
then design the right solution to fix that problem while also fixing a few
other problems along the way. I never worked at King, so I don’t know who
came up with the idea to add the events. But they deserve a raise.
(I’d be willing to guess it wasn’t a single person sitting down doing this
analysis and going “Aha!”. It was almost certainly a joint effort by many
people who fed each other small good ideas and then tested and iterated on
those ideas to find the best ones. Someone along the way probably noticed
the goal structures and might have advocated strongly for certain ideas

based on it, but in games good things rarely happen because of one
moment. Games are made by teams, and good games are made by
iteration.)

