Chapter 2
مجرفة Knight / Verbs
DOI: 10.1201/9781003346586-2

مجرفة Knight is a great لعبة.
مجرفة Knight came out in 2014 when indie ألعاب were just becoming a
thing. مجرفة Knight is a great example of the retro movement, where
ألعاب are created to honor the classic ألعاب of old. مجرفة Knight evokes
the feel of old-school 2D platforms like Super Mario Bros or Castlevania
but also adds its own unique twists.
This dissection is specific to مجرفة Knight: مجرفة of Hope, the original
لعبة in the series (Figure 2.1). Sequels and spinoffs usually require their
own dissections, even if some aspects may be the same.

Figure 2.1 مجرفة Knight screenshot.

مجرفة Knight: Gameplay Dissection
Verbs
To understand a لعبة, the best place to start is the verbs. What actions يستطيع
the لاعب take?
Games are different from other forms of entertainment like books and
movies. ال biggest difference is الذي - التي in ألعاب, the لاعب gets to do things.
ال لاعب يستطيع change what happens in the experience through their choices
and other actions. When أنت’re reading Hamlet (Shakespeare 1604), هو - هي’s
always going to end the same way, and Hamlet’s always going to drag his
feet to get there. When أنت’re playing a لعبة of Go with a friend, أنت
don’t know who’s going to win or how they’re going to do هو - هي. That
combination of agency and uncertainty is what makes ألعاب fun. Games
are interactive.
So, when أنت’re trying to understand a لعبة, start with questions about
interactivity. What does the لاعب do? What actions يستطيع the لاعب take?
There’s more to understand than just الذي - التي, but هو - هي’s a good place to start.
In مجرفة Knight, the لاعب يستطيع move around and hit things with a
shovel. Movement is a combination of running and jumping. ال core
gameplay is Run, Jump, and Attack. ال لاعب يستطيع complete 90% of the
لعبة by just doing these three things. These are the core actions of هذا
لعبة.
But how do we know الذي - التي? Let’s dig a little deeper.

Advanced Verb-ing
One theme throughout هذا book is الذي - التي لعبة dissections depend on your
goals مثل a dissector. If أنت’re just trying to get a rough understanding of
مجرفة Knight, understanding الذي - التي the لاعب’s actions are Run, Jump, and

Attack is enough. Stop there, move on. That’s a completely valid approach
and أنت يستطيع pat yourself on the back.
But sometimes أنت need to know more. If أنت’re going to start work on
the a 2d platformer team, or أنت’re going to make a لعبة inspired by
مجرفة Knight, or أنت’re writing a dissertation on هو - هي, أنت need to understand
لاعب actions at a deeper level.
And sometimes the verbs may not be مثل obvious. If أنت’re not sure what
counts مثل a core action, أنت may need to spend a little more time analyzing
before أنت يستطيع say الذي - التي with authority.
When أنت’re doing a deep analysis of a new لعبة, هو - هي’s useful to start
with every verb أنت يستطيع think of. Go through the controller diagram. Think
about what أنت do when أنت play the لعبة, especially the choices الذي - التي أنت
deliberate over. Ask your friends “What do أنت do in هذا لعبة?” Read the
wiki if there is one. Write هو - هي all down مثل a starting point.
Let’s do الذي - التي for مجرفة Knight:
Run
Run Right (right on the controller while on the ground)
Run Left (left on the controller while on the ground)
Attack (press the attack button, officially called “Dig Slash”)
Jump (jump button while on the ground)
Jump Right (jump button while moving right)
Jump Left (jump button while moving left)
Fall (what happens after أنت jump or are in the air for another reason)
Air Control (moving right/left while in the air)
Drop Attack (a combination of falling and attacking triggered by
pressing down while in the air, officially called “مجرفة Drop”)
Dodge (move or jump to avoid an enemy or other hazard)

Fight (move and attack against an enemy, with a combination of
different actions mixed together)
Boss Fight (fight, but with more complicated things going on)
Wait (don’t do anything, sometimes important to get timing right)
Dig (attack a pile of dirt to get things out of هو - هي)
Break (attack an object like a chest or wall to destroy هو - هي)
Loot (technically pulling things out of a chest is a different action than
breaking the chest open)
Juggle (hit something الذي - التي is falling, which sends هو - هي up again)
Die (lose health or fall in a pit)
Talk (press up while near a Non-Player Character (NPC) to initiate
dialog)
Buy (choose a text option to spend money or otherwise acquire a
thing)
Fish (use an inventory item to try to get stuff)
Use Relic (use an inventory item at the cost of Magic, with about a
dozen different ones الذي - التي يستطيع be acquired)
Drink (use an inventory item to gain a bonus)
Play Music (select music via a conversation with an NPC)
Charge Slash (a modified attack earned later in the لعبة)
Uncover (sometimes when أنت destroy something, there is another
object or enemy behind هو - هي الذي - التي enters the scene)
Mini-Game (there are places where أنت يستطيع play little sub-ألعاب with
different goals)
Explore (look around and move around to find something new)
Find (basically the same مثل Explore, but possibly referring to a specific
thing أنت were looking for)

Gather (pick up coins or other things, which happens naturally when
the character touches them)
Collect (usually used to mean the same thing مثل Gather but يستطيع also
refer to Feats or other more abstract things)
Plan (connect a series of actions in your mind and think about using
them together, possibly with specific timing)
Position (place yourself in the right place)
Observe (watch how the objects in the world work)
Learn (uncover the systems of the لعبة and how they work)
Predict (use what أنت’ve learned to come up with a theory about what
will happen next)
Watch (cut scenes)
Travel (move on the map view الذي - التي is used to select level)
Showdown (a separate play mode الذي - التي أنا’m ignoring for هذا dissection)
Challenge Mode (another separate play mode)
New Game (UI action to start a لعبة)
Enter Name (UI action to label a لعبة save)
Body Swap (change avatar appearance)
You يستطيع see how هذا list يستطيع get pretty long. Let’s talk about how to turn
هذا big list into a smaller list الذي - التي is more useful.
To start, let’s analyze these words. Which verbs relate to each other?
Which do أنت think of together when أنت’re playing?

Pre-Verbs
If أنت’re dissecting an idea for a new لعبة أنت’re thinking about, أنت won’t have a controller
diagram to get أنت started. Instead, أنت need to identify the verbs based on the information أنت
do have.
When أنت’re describing the idea to people, what actions do أنت talk about?
When أنت play the لعبة in your head, what is هو - هي الذي - التي أنت’re doing?
Picture the لعبة on a controller. What would the buttons do?
This might be hard. ال inspiration for a لعبة idea يستطيع start with a story or a cool new feature
or other things. But if أنت find الذي - التي your لعبة idea doesn’t have clear verbs, الذي - التي’s a sign الذي - التي
your idea isn’t really complete yet.
Understanding the core loop is a key part of early ideation. You يستطيع’t pitch a لعبة if أنت
يستطيع’t describe what the لاعب is going to actually do in الذي - التي لعبة. If هذا happens, أنت need to
spend some more time thinking هذا through before moving on.

Direct Action Verbs
Since we’re trying to understand interactivity, we want to focus on verbs
الذي - التي are about the لاعب directly doing something. Look for verbs where the
لاعب does something الذي - التي sends input to the computer – هذا يستطيع be
pressing a button, pushing on a stick, touching a touchpad, or anything else.
When the لاعب does هذا, the لعبة responds. ال لعبة rules recognize
the لاعب’s action مثل something important, and something in the لعبة’s
model of the world changes (Figure 2.2). These are key to interactivity.

Figure 2.2 Flow chart showing how the لاعب does something,
foreshadowing bigger flow charts coming up soon.
Once we identify things the لاعب يستطيع do, we يستطيع look for verbs الذي - التي all
relate to the same type of action. Any لاعب actions الذي - التي result in the same
response from the لعبة يستطيع be grouped together. That’s what we’re looking
for.
Looking over the big list, we يستطيع group a bunch of movement-related
verbs together. All of these are used by the لاعب to change the position of
their avatar character.
Run
Run Right (right on the controller while on the ground)
Run Left (left on the controller while on the ground)
Jump (jump button while on the ground)
Jump Right (jump button while moving right)
Jump Left (jump button while moving left)
Air Control (moving right/left while in the air)
ال important thing here is to recognize الذي - التي the لاعب controls an avatar in
a 2D space by changing the avatar’s position (and orientation) in the world.
There are a lot of different movement controls with slight nuanced
differences. ال diversity of specific movement controls is a good sign الذي - التي
navigating through the world is important in هذا لعبة.
Each of these is important to understand if أنت’re really trying to dig
deep on how مجرفة Knight works. Doubly so for other ألعاب with more
complex controls to navigate more complex 3D scenes. But for right now,
we يستطيع group them all together مثل “Move”. We’ll talk about more ways to
differentiate these types of overlapping verbs later.

Deeper Dives: Research
When أنا start working on a لعبة الذي - التي fits into an existing genre or has a clear relationship with
another لعبة, هو - هي’s important to start by doing a deep analysis of الذي - التي related لعبة.
Play the لعبة thoroughly yourself and reflect on the experience.
Play related ألعاب.
Watch other people play the لعبة. Social media يستطيع be great for هذا.
If هو - هي happens to be a لعبة with an active fandom, read up on what they think. Try to build
the knowledge الذي - التي a fan would have. There will always be fans with deeper knowledge
than أنت – some fans are great with details – and الذي - التي’s OK.

ال next set of verbs is combat related:
Attack (press the attack button, officially called “Dig Slash”)
Drop Attack (a combination of falling and attacking triggered by
pressing down while in the air, officially called “مجرفة Drop”)
Charge Slash (a modified attack earned later in the لعبة)
Dodge (move or jump to avoid an enemy or other hazard)
Fight (move and attack against an enemy, with a combination of
different actions mixed together)
Boss Fight (fight, but with more complicated things going on)
There are lots of ways to inflict damage on enemies. ال لاعب provides an
input and then the لعبة rules decide if an enemy takes damage and how
much. أنا think we يستطيع comfortably group these verbs together and talk about
“Attack” مثل one of the big concepts in مجرفة Knight.
ال final set of direct لاعب actions are all object-related. ال لاعب has
an inventory of special actions they يستطيع take (by pressing up and attack).
There are about a dozen different Relics the لاعب يستطيع acquire over the
course of the لعبة with various different effects, ranging from healing to

attacks to earning money. Most of these deplete the لاعب’s Magic stat
when used.
Use Relic (use an inventory item at the cost of Magic, with about a
dozen different ones الذي - التي يستطيع be acquired)

Indirect Action Verbs
Action Verbs الذي - التي describe what the لاعب يستطيع do are the most important
for understanding the core of a لعبة, but there are a variety of other verbs
الذي - التي happen during a لعبة الذي - التي are important to understand.
Die (lose health or fall in a pit)
Gather (pick up coins or other things, which happens naturally when
the character touches them)
Collect (usually used to mean the same thing مثل Gather, but يستطيع also
refer to Feats or other more abstract things)
Uncover (sometimes when أنت destroy something, there is another
object or enemy behind هو - هي الذي - التي enters the scene)
There are verbs الذي - التي happen in the لعبة but are not directly triggered by the
لاعب. These are more of a consequence of a لاعب action than the action
itself. ال لاعب never presses “Collect” in مجرفة Knight – they just walk
over to an object and if هو - هي’s the right type of object, like a gem, هو - هي just gets
collected. ال لاعب might do الذي - التي intentionally, but the “do” the لاعب
does is just movement.
There are also object actions the لاعب يستطيع take based on the items in the
world around them. These use the existing controls but change the results
based on the objects in the world when the لاعب performs their action.
These are important to understand but are less core than the actions.

Talk (press up while near an NPC to initiate dialog)
Fall (what happens after أنت jump or are in the air for another reason)
Dig (attack a pile of dirt to get things out of هو - هي)
Break (attack an object like a chest or wall to destroy هو - هي)
Juggle (hit something الذي - التي أنت’ve previously hit to keep هو - هي in the air)
Buy (choose a text option to spend money or otherwise acquire a
thing)
Play Music (select music via a conversation with an NPC)
Loot (technically pulling things out of a chest is a different action than
breaking the chest open)
ال most common type of object interaction is talking with NPCs. أنا know
هو - هي’s a bit rude to call NPCs objects, but from the perspective of the code
there’s not much difference.
Technically أنت could call combat an indirect action because هو - هي only
makes sense if there’s an enemy nearby and there isn’t always an enemy
nearby. This is a clever point, but given the frequency of enemies in the
level design, أنا think هو - هي’s fair to call “Attack” a core gameplay action. If
someone re-made مجرفة Knight with significantly fewer enemies and more
depth to the NPC interactions, هو - هي would be an interesting way to make an
entirely different لعبة in a different genre without changing the core
engine or code or لاعب actions of مجرفة Knight. But هو - هي wouldn’t be مجرفة
Knight. More on content and how هو - هي changes the لعبة in a later chapter.

Abstract Verbs
Dodge (move or jump to avoid an enemy or other hazards)
Explore (find something new)

Find (basically the same مثل Explore, but possibly referring to a specific
thing أنت were looking for)
Plan (connect a series of actions in your mind and think about using
them together, possibly with specific timing)
Position (place yourself in the right place)
Observe (watch how the objects in the world work)
Learn (uncover the systems of the لعبة and how they work)
Predict (use what أنت’ve learned to come up with a theory about what
will happen next)
Mini-Game (there are places where أنت يستطيع play little sub-ألعاب with
different goals)
There are a number of potential verbs we identified الذي - التي aren’t things the
لاعب يستطيع do. These are things the لاعب thinks about when doing other
things – these are why the لاعب does things, not what the لاعب does. So,
these are important to consider, but أنا would categorize these مثل goals, not
actions. These are incredibly important to understand and are fundamental
to understanding the core لعبة loop, but أنا’d put them in a different
category than direct لاعب actions, and we’ll cover them in a later chapter.

Interface Verbs
Watch (cut scenes)
Travel (move on the map view الذي - التي is used to select level)
Showdown (a separate play mode الذي - التي أنا’m mostly ignoring for هذا
dissection)
Challenge Mode (another separate play mode)
New Game (UI action to start a لعبة)
Enter Name (UI action to label a لعبة save)

Body Swap (change avatar appearance)
There are a number of actions الذي - التي the لاعب takes entirely in the UI (User
Interface), outside of core gameplay. In a لعبة like مجرفة Knight, هو - هي’s easy
to distinguish when the لاعب is controlling an avatar (مجرفة Knight) in
the لعبة world versus when the لاعب is selecting words in a menu. ال
UI is something outside the illusion of the لعبة, which is necessary but not
part of the fun. If أنت’re working on designing the UI, definitely think these
through and consider all the options. But for هذا لعبة, they are not core
gameplay.

Deeper Dives: Frame by Frame
For fast-paced ألعاب, one technique أنا find very useful is to record a short video of the core
gameplay, then step through the video frame by frame. Watch closely, and أنت’ll see lots of little
things الذي - التي the developer does to make things work. Visual effects الذي - التي communicate important
information to the لاعب, little tricks of physics to make things flow better, and complex camera
behaviors so the لاعب’s attention is on the right things. These are great when أنت need to know
everything about a لعبة. But most of هذا chapter is for when أنت’re just starting to understand
a لعبة.

Games مثل Input/Output
To help understand why these different types of verbs are different, let’s talk
about how ألعاب work. As with most things, ألعاب يستطيع be understood in a
lot of ways. This is one of those ways.
When a لاعب plays a video لعبة, they are participating in an exchange
with a computer. ال لاعب provides inputs through a device of some sort –
a لعبة controller, a keyboard, a touch screen – and the computer processes
الذي - التي inputs and then provides an output for the لاعب – pixels on a screen.
ال computer uses a set of rules and logic and code to determine how the
لاعب’s input changes the pixels. ال rules and logic and code are what the

لعبة designer controls. That is what we call the لعبة. But everything else
is important to understand مثل هو - هي creates the full experience.
This يستطيع be represented in a diagram like Figure 2.3.

Figure 2.3 Input Output.
ال left side of هذا image represents the لاعب. What they see, what they
think, what they do. ال right side of هذا image represents the computer.
All the electrical impulses tickle the microchips based on the code of the
لعبة.
Let’s step through a simple single-لعبة action based on هذا model. ال
لاعب is enjoying a pleasant time in مجرفة Knight (Figure 2.4). They
notice some gems above and to the left, so they decide to jump to gather
them.

Figure 2.4 مجرفة Knight لعبة screen showing the moment
before the لاعب makes a decision.
We start by noting الذي - التي the لاعب has made a decision (Figure 2.5). This
is how things start in ألعاب – things happen in the لاعب’s brain. ال root
of all gameplay is imagination.

Figure 2.5 أنا want to jump.

In order for the لعبة to do anything, هذا thought needs to get from the
لاعب’s brain to the computer (Figure 2.6). There are all sorts of useful
input devices designed to make هذا happen. ال nature of the input device
has a large impact on the لاعب’s experience, and new types of input
devices like the iPhone’s touch screen or the Wii’s motion controller يستطيع
lead to huge changes in the video لعبة industry.

Figure 2.6 Press the button.
For our current discussion, هو - هي doesn’t really matter what input device is
being used. ال important thing is الذي - التي the لاعب presses a button on the PC
or لعبة controller الذي - التي indicates الذي - التي the لاعب wants the character (مجرفة
Knight) to jump.
This information then flows into the computer (Figure 2.7). A series of
electrical impulses flow from the controller through a wire into the
computer, where chips translate the signals into the code.

Figure 2.7 Electrons flow.
ال code then processes the new information (Figure 2.8). ال code
knows الذي - التي هذا sequence of electrical impulses means الذي - التي هذا button was
pressed. And هذا button means jumping. And jumping means many things:
ال position of the avatar character changes, moving them upward.
Most ألعاب have a physics engine الذي - التي controls positions and motion,
so هذا is done by adding a force in a direction to the character and
letting the physics logic compute the exact change in position.
Because of the physics engine, gravity starts operating on the
character, changing their motion over time.
ال character’s animation changes from a standing animation to a
jumping animation.
This changes the character’s state – the character is now in the air.
Now different inputs and outputs are possible. If the لاعب presses
down now, the character will go into a downward attack state, مثل
defined by the لعبة rules written into the code. Pressing the jump
button again won’t do anything.

And all of هذا needs to be reflected in the pixels on the screen.

Figure 2.8 Character enters jump state.
This last point is important. ال state changes in the code only matter if
the لاعب يستطيع understand them. Most video ألعاب يستطيع only communicate
their internal changes through a screen. Any change to the internal state and
logic of the لعبة needs to be expressed in pixels so the لاعب يستطيع process
هو - هي (Figure 2.9). Setting up the right pixels is a combination of لعبة art to
reflect changes in the لعبة world and UI/UX design to reflect changes in
the data presented by the لعبة. Both are important and ideally both work
together to produce the best result.

Figure 2.9 Pixels change.
ال لاعب has their own complex system of input devices الذي - التي they use
to process incoming information – eyes, ears, noses, etc. Good ألعاب will
reinforce their messages using مثل many senses مثل possible (Figure 2.10).
Starting with visual, often using audio, and occasionally adding some
vibration so the لاعب يستطيع feel what is happening. Smell and taste don’t
come up مثل often, but أنا’m sure smell-o-vision will be everywhere in a few
years.

Figure 2.10 Player notices change.
And then the cycle begins anew. Once the لاعب processes هذا new
information, they want new things (Figure 2.11). For example, الذي - التي frog
might be a problem, so the لاعب may need to change their direction or
enter an attack state to avoid taking damage (Figure 2.12). ال full لعبة
experience is a long sequence of very quick input/output cycles الذي - التي add up
to create something greater than each part.

Figure 2.11 Player wants new thing.

Figure 2.12 Screenshot of مجرفة Knight, showing a jump has
begun.

Verbed Input/Output
This Input/Output flow gives us a way to understand the differences in
different types of verbs. Each verb operates on a specific step of the
diagram مثل seen in Figure 2.13.

Figure 2.13 Input verbs and output goals.
ال Direct Action verbs are controller inputs delivered by the لاعب.
ال Indirect Action verbs are things الذي - التي happen in the computer based
on the لاعب actions.
ال Abstract verbs are going on in the لاعب’s head, helping them
plan out their next action but not happening مثل a direct result of a
controller input.
Interface verbs affect things the لاعب sees in the Game Display الذي - التي
are not part of the لعبة world.
This helps explain why the Direct Action verbs are the most important for
an initial understanding of the لعبة. They are the simplest and most clear
actions الذي - التي shape the range of options for everything else. They are where
the لاعب الذي - التي exists in the real world interacts with the لعبة. ال لعبة
rules only decide to break things after the لاعب uses the attack action. And
the لاعب’s desires are similarly shaped by the range of inputs the لعبة
allows. ال لاعب may want to build a bridge or get a drink at the bar but
without a related button الذي - التي desire is going to go unfulfilled.

ال actions the لاعب يستطيع take shape everything about the لعبة. So,
start there if أنت want to understand the لعبة.

Understanding Verbs
Verbs are just the first step.
If مجرفة Knight is about Moving and Attacking, so is Halo (2001). So is
Super Mario Bros (1985). So is God of War (2005). But these are all very
different ألعاب.
ال second step in a لعبة dissection is to understand the nature of the
verbs and how they fit together. We’ll talk more about systems later, but the
core ideas of systems thinking is الذي - التي the relationships between things (in
هذا case verbs) يستطيع be مثل complex and interesting مثل the things themselves.
So, let’s start with our two core verbs.

Overlapping Verbs with Different Rules
So, we’ve broken مجرفة Knight into the Core Verbs of “Move” and
“Attack” but want to understand more about them.
Going back to our definition of ألعاب in the first chapter يستطيع help. We’ve
already covered Interactivity – the choices and skills الذي - التي make up the Big
Verbs. Next on the list is Rules.
So, our Verbs are what the لاعب يستطيع do. ال Rules are how the لعبة
responds to those prompts from the لاعب (Figure 2.14). “When the لاعب
does X, the لعبة does Y”

Figure 2.14 Outputs.
In a board لعبة, these are written out explicitly. “When أنت pass GO,
collect $200”. A core verb in Monopoly (1935) is move, so “pass GO” is
something الذي - التي يستطيع happen naturally مثل a result of the لاعب’s action.
ال same sort of thing happens in a video لعبة like مجرفة Knight.
When أنت touch an enemy, أنت lose health. When أنت walk over a health
pack, there are fewer health packs in the level and أنت have more health.
ال لاعب does something, and the لعبة responds.
Moving in مجرفة Knight is about position, and position interacts with a
lot of لعبة rules.
Where أنت are relative to an enemy determines whether or not أنت get
hit by an enemy attack.
Where أنت are and where أنت’re pointing determines if your attack
hits the enemy when أنت trigger an attack.
Where أنت are determines when أنت pick up gems, powerups, or other
items.
Where أنت are determines what أنت يستطيع see – the لعبة only shows
أنت one screen at a time, based on لاعب position.

Where أنت are triggers progression through levels, including triggering
cut scenes الذي - التي advance the story.
This is similar in a 3D first-person shooter but with some important
differences:
Where أنت are determines whether or not أنت get hit by an enemy
attack.
Where أنت are and where أنت’re pointing determines if your attack
hits the enemy.
Where أنت are determines when أنت pick up ammo, weapons,
powerups, or other items.
Where أنت are and where أنت’re pointing determines what أنت يستطيع
see, using a first-person perspective.
Where أنت are triggers progression through levels, including triggering
cut scenes الذي - التي advance the story.
So, one way أنت يستطيع differentiate similar verbs is by looking at the rules
and consequences of those verbs. When there are mechanic differences,
those are indicators الذي - التي the verbs may sound the same but are functionally
very different.

Overlapping Verbs with Different Goals
Looking at how verbs interact with rules is helpful. ال processes going on
in the computer يستطيع change how the verbs work. But the processes going on
in the لاعب’s head are even more important.
Why does the لاعب use verbs?
Verbs are used to achieve goals.

Verbs only mean something in the context of the لاعب’s goals.
What are the لاعب’s goals in مجرفة Knight? Let’s do a quick brainstorm
like we did for verbs.
Rescue Shield Knight.
Help the characters أنت meet.
Defeat enemies.
Reach the end of the level.
Trigger the next cut scene.
Unlock new areas.
Get to the end of the لعبة.
Don’t die.
Some of these (“Rescue Shield Knight” and “Help the characters أنت
meet”) are story, not gameplay. Story is an important part of most ألعاب,
but when we’re still assembling a core loop, هو - هي’s not the most important
thing to understand. Story motivates players to complete the لعبة, هو - هي
doesn’t motivate the players’ actions from moment to moment. At least for
a لعبة like هذا – some ألعاب like Baldur’s Gate (1998) or Life Is Strange
(2015) make story a key part of every level of gameplay. But a لعبة like
مجرفة Knight does not weave the story into every moment of gameplay
like هذا.
ال goals الذي - التي are woven into every moment of gameplay are the ones
like “Defeat enemies” or “Reach the end of the level” الذي - التي guide لاعب
actions in every moment. This is what the لاعب is trying to do during
gameplay, and هذا is why the لاعب engages with the verbs of the لعبة.
ال لاعب attacks to defeat enemies and moves to reach the end of the
level.

ال next few goals (“Trigger the next cut scene”, “Unlock new areas”,
and “Get to the end of the لعبة”) are just “Beat the level” phrased slightly
differently. When أنت’re considering goals or verbs, keep an eye out for
overlapping terms like هذا.
ال final objective “Don’t die” isn’t really a goal per se but is more of a
fail case. If the لاعب dies, they have to reset a little ways back. Death
never stops أنت from progressing, but هو - هي يستطيع definitely slow أنت down.

Verb to the Goal
So how does the لاعب turn “Move” and “Attack” into completed levels?
They move through the level to find a route الذي - التي gets to the next area while
avoiding or attacking any threats. Most areas have a little challenge or
puzzle to advance. Some areas require jumping over pits. Some require
jumping off objects to get up high. Each area has a different combination of
challenges الذي - التي makes هو - هي interesting and different. More on الذي - التي later.

Big Verbs
OK, so we’ve defined the big verbs in مجرفة Knight مثل Move and Attack.
That feels right. When أنا play the لعبة, أنا spend most of my time doing
those things. And thinking about those two things and how to do them
better.
If أنت want to understand a لعبة, understand the things the لاعب
spends most of their time doing. Sometimes there are other features الذي - التي are
splashy and interesting and become the focus of the marketing and
discussion around the لعبة. But a لعبة designer needs to think about the
thing the لاعب is actually investing their time on.

You يستطيع see هذا in lots of different types of ألعاب. Platformers spend a
lot of time perfecting their jumping and running. In an open world لعبة,
أنت spend most of your time moving from place to place. ال open world
ألعاب الذي - التي succeed are the ones الذي - التي هذا travel fun and engaging.

Verb مثل Genre
As we’ll see in future chapters, verbs are a good way to differentiate and organize ألعاب. All
first-person shooters start with move and attack. Platformers like Mario focus heavily on move,
with varying amounts of attack depending on the platformer.
But a لعبة like SimCity doesn’t have move مثل a verb at all – the primary verb there is build.
This makes sense – أنا think most people would agree الذي - التي platformers have more overlap with
shooters than with builders.
This يستطيع be useful to know. If أنت’re looking for inspiration on your city builder, هو - هي might not
be best to start by playing some Halo. Maybe find a puzzle لعبة like Triple Town الذي - التي shares
“Build” مثل a verb to see how هو - هي’s done differently there.

More to Come
We’re going to stop our مجرفة Knight gameplay analysis here. أنا know
we’ve barely scratched the surface of مجرفة Knight and platformers in
general. But we’re building foundations here. It’ll get crazier in later
chapters.
ال last part of هذا analysis pulls some ideas from future chapters, but أنا
like showing a version of the same diagram for each لعبة, so forgive me
for the spoilers. This diagram represents each لعبة مثل a formula. ال
لاعب has verbs they يستطيع use to reach goals but are blocked by challenges.
Figure 2.15 shows the simplest level of detail, breaking each step into a
single element. Figure 2.16 is a bit more useful in الذي - التي هو - هي breaks each of
these categories into multiple entries, showing the different actions and
challenges of the لعبة:

Figure 2.15 مجرفة Knight flow diagram showing Verbs,
Challenges, and Goals.

Figure 2.16 مجرفة Knight flow diagram with more boxes.
Each level is a package of these different pieces, مثل shown in Figure 2.17.
In مجرفة Knight, most of the variation comes from changing out the
challenges, but other ألعاب يستطيع handle هذا differently.

Figure 2.17 مجرفة Knight flow مثل a level.
Multiple levels يستطيع be added together to represent the full flow of the
لعبة, مثل players work on larger goals and larger challenges. See Figure
2.18.

Figure 2.18 مجرفة Knight flow from level to level.
We’ll dig into these ideas in more detail in later chapters, but before we
leave مجرفة Knight, let’s talk about other things الذي - التي influence gameplay.

مجرفة Knight: Non-Gameplay Dissection
When dissecting, هو - هي’s not just about gameplay. Even for a لعبة designer.
If أنت want to understand the gameplay of a لعبة, أنت have to
understand everything about هو - هي. How do the non-gameplay aspects of the
لعبة tie into the gameplay? Where did the gameplay ideas come from?
What led to the gameplay decisions أنت see in the لعبة? ال لعبة itself
makes much more sense if أنت understand the context الذي - التي led to those
decisions.
To be clear, أنا did not work on (most of) the ألعاب أنا talk about in هذا
book. أنا do not know how decisions were made by the teams الذي - التي did. We’re
talking about these things مثل an outsider, piecing things together from what
we يستطيع see in the لعبة and generally available knowledge. أنا’m sure there
are interesting stories there, and أنا encourage those who were present to
write them down so أنا يستطيع read those books. أنا love to know authorial intent,
but unless الذي - التي’s أنت, the rest of us are left with the work itself. And there’s
plenty to see there.

Senses
Gameplay is influenced by the look and feel of the لعبة.
مجرفة Knight has a very clear and distinct style. It’s a retro لعبة trying
to emulate the feel and visuals and sounds and complete experience of a
classic platformer. In هذا sense, the style fits very clearly with the
gameplay. People who are familiar with the references will expect the
gameplay and style to both align with their perception of those earlier
ألعاب. And people who don’t know the classics will still understand الذي - التي
both gameplay and style evoke an earlier age, so don’t expect integrated AI
and vast open worlds and high-fidelity graphics.

ال simplicity of the لعبة also makes هو - هي easy to see where gameplay and
graphics intersect. Remember our input/output diagram – the output part of
the diagram is made up of pixels on a screen الذي - التي the computer manipulates.
This is the لاعب’s only source of information on what is going on in the
لعبة (well, الذي - التي plus sound and sometimes vibration). As a لعبة designer,
these pixels are all أنت have to get your ideas across to the لاعب. A لاعب
who might not really be paying attention and who most likely hasn’t played
every previous لعبة الذي - التي أنت (the لعبة designer) did. This is a difficult
and momentous responsibility for a few measly pixels.
Every لعبة has to create a visual vocabulary of what matters to the
لاعب and to gameplay – using the same size, shape, color, or whatever
consistently helps the لاعب learn what to do and then quickly process new
scenes. مجرفة Knight does a great job of quickly establishing what the
لاعب needs to know and sticks with الذي - التي throughout the لعبة:
ال ground أنت walk on is flat – usually rectangles – and high contrast
against the rest of the background.
Objects أنت يستطيع interact with are also high contrast and often include
movement. ال لعبة intentionally doesn’t create separate
vocabularies for enemies and rewards, مثل هو - هي wants to play with الذي - التي in
the gameplay. Sometimes bouncing on an enemy’s head is the only
way to reach a reward. Sometimes a reward is in a dangerous place
making هو - هي more of a problem than a pure benefit.
Combat actions and results are always clearly punctuated. Enemies
don’t just disappear – they vanish in a little cloud of smoke. If the
لاعب missed the frame where they died, the لعبة is still
communicating for a few frames after.
مجرفة Knight’s shovel provides a nice strong indicator of where the
character is facing. This is especially handy for communicating the

difference between “falling” and “falling with intent to kill”. ال
downward shovel attack is important and might not be noticed without
the big bright object الذي - التي moves around the character.

History and Influences
أنا’m a big fan of stealing ideas from other ألعاب. No لعبة is an island.
Every لعبة is inspired by the ideas and execution of ألعاب (and other
things) الذي - التي came before.
There’s an important distinction to be made here. All ألعاب are inspired.
All ألعاب borrow and “steal”. But when أنت draw inspiration from
something, أنت need to be careful to not draw too heavily. If your لعبة is
just a copy of someone else’s idea, الذي - التي’s actual stealing, not the tongue-incheek way أنا sometimes use the term. If your لعبة gets all its features and
ideas from another لعبة and doesn’t add or change them in a way to make
something new, then أنت need to rethink and start over to add your own
twist on the thing.
You يستطيع see هذا in مجرفة Knight. مجرفة Knight is a wonderful and
unique لعبة. But almost every aspect of مجرفة Knight comes from
somewhere else.
Super Mario Bros (1985) is generally credited with popularizing the
2D side-scrolling platformer genre.
But many of the ideas from Super Mario Bros were first developed in
the Mario Bros (1983) arcade لعبة, and borrowed from earlier ألعاب
like Space Panic (1980).
Many 2D side-scrollers after Mario added attacks like مجرفة Knight’s
shovel, including popular ألعاب like Metroid (1986) and Castlevania
(1986).

Once the seeds of the genre had been planted there are many great
ألعاب الذي - التي took those ideas and adapted them for PC gaming,
including Lode Runner (1983), Commander Keen (1990), and Cave
Story (2004).
Braid (2008) and Spelunky (2008) popularized the idea of using 2D
platformers مثل a simple and nostalgic base to experiment with
interesting indie لعبة ideas.
As a لعبة designer, هو - هي’s important to know the history of not just the ألعاب
but also the features. Jumping from platform to platform in مجرفة Knight is
interesting but is informed by many other ألعاب before, and feeds into
many other ألعاب after. Dissecting each of those ألعاب, at least in terms of
الذي - التي specific feature, helps أنت see how to use الذي - التي feature in your own
ألعاب. Johnnemann Nordhagen took هذا idea even further and built a لعبة
الذي - التي collects all the different ways الذي - التي a specific mechanic has been
executed over the years. Museum of Mechanics: Lockpicking (Dim Bulb
Games, 2022) is an interesting way to see how ألعاب borrow and share and
innovate on specific ideas.

Monetization
How a لعبة makes money has a huge effect on the design of the لعبة.
There are a few major trends in monetization الذي - التي had huge impacts on
the types of ألعاب we associate with each era:
1. Arcade ألعاب. Monetization is quarter-based. (Technically
monetization for the developer is by selling arcade cabinets, but the
cabinet buyers were very interested in quarter throughput, so the
developers developed to الذي - التي metric.) ال goal was to get the لاعب to
notice the لعبة in a crowded arcade, and then plug in مثل many

quarters مثل possible in مثل little time مثل possible. This led to لعبة with
very quick session lengths, very steep difficulty curves, and little to no
thought about ongoing long-term play.
2. Console ألعاب. Monetization is based on selling boxes in stores, with
no internet to provide updates or live services after الذي - التي. At first early
consoles tried to mimic ألعاب الذي - التي players knew from the arcade, but
soon the focus became value. Games were reviewed based on hours of
play. Look at the difference between Mario Bros and Super Mario
Bros to see a clear example of هذا change.
3. Mobile ألعاب. Monetization is based on downloads and (after the first
few years) in-app purchases. ال goal is to get a لاعب in quickly and
easily, then keep them around for long enough الذي - التي they get
comfortable spending money. ال growth of big data plays a big part
here, مثل لعبة developers start to analyze what actually gets people to
stick around and spend money. Game sessions are short, but players
are expected to stick around for months or years.
This is not an exhaustive list by any means. Early PC ألعاب resembled
console ألعاب but with a lot of their own twists. Console has been
changing with the growth of downloadable upgrades. Most of هذا doesn’t
apply to educational ألعاب or other ألعاب for change, which have entirely
separate monetization goals and pathways. Each لعبة’s monetization needs
to be analyzed separately but with an understanding of how هو - هي fits into the
standard monetization schemes of its time.
مجرفة Knight makes most of its money through downloads on PC لعبة
services like Steam. This is currently the dominant sales platform on PC,
and the growth of independent routes to sell and market ألعاب without
interacting with big publishers and retailers is a big part of why indie ألعاب
like مجرفة Knight exist and succeed. A successful Steam لعبة يستطيع support

a small indie team with a good idea, but console ألعاب generally have to be
bigger.
مجرفة Knight started out on Kickstarter, raising money for the initial
development through crowdfunding. Kickstarter and similar platforms are a
popular way for smaller indie ألعاب to generate some initial funds and
market an early idea. ال initial money helps, but the initial fan base is مثل
or more important to making a small لعبة with a small (or zero) marketing
budget a success.
Since its release, مجرفة Knight has shipped multiple downloadable
content (DLC) packs, which have later been released مثل separate ألعاب.
مجرفة Knight has become a series with explorations in multiple genres and
different playstyles.
Selling مثل a single purchase drives مجرفة Knight to focus on providing a
complete package. Deeper progression and varied content make the single
purchase feel worth هو - هي, generating good word-of-mouth to keep the لعبة
selling.

Narrative
Story and gameplay are friends. They work together to bring joy and
happiness to players. Different ألعاب make more or less use of هذا
friendship. مجرفة Knight is a great example of the most common use of
story in ألعاب.
In مجرفة Knight, the main use of story is to provide emotional context
for the لاعب’s progression and emotional punctuation at key points. ال
لعبة establishes early on الذي - التي مجرفة Knight is trying to rescue their friend
Shield Knight. A classic rescue mission, which is a great way to make a
لاعب want to reach the end. My friend needs help!

Most of the time, هذا is just a small piece of background motivation.
During gameplay, the لعبة doesn’t make reference to Shield Knight or
anything else about the characters. Bosses get a quick intro to establish their
character, during which the لاعب has no input. ال لعبة stops to tell the
story. Then after a big level, there is a short dream sequence الذي - التي reminds
the لاعب of هذا long-term goal and provides some interactive rewards مثل
well. Some of the NPCs provide additional narration and backstory, but هو - هي’s
all contained in a few sentences so هو - هي never gets too involved or deep.
This is great. This is exactly what most ألعاب want. Story is there.
Emotions are triggered. ال لاعب knows why they’re doing all هذا, and if
the لاعب puts the لعبة down for too long, they feel a little guilty. Poor
Shield Knight. ال story is fun and interesting, and the لعبة is stronger
because of هو - هي.
Some ألعاب use story in deeper and more complicated ways. And أنا love
those ألعاب, too. But أنا’ve made some of them so أنا know how complicated
and difficult هو - هي يستطيع be to interweave story and gameplay in ways الذي - التي
actually matter. More on الذي - التي later.

Emotions
Story is one source of emotions, but ألعاب يستطيع evoke many emotions.
For action ألعاب, the most common emotion is frustration, which might
sound like a problem, but هو - هي really isn’t. Talking about ألعاب for the last
few decades, أنا’ve noticed الذي - التي there are many flavors of frustration. Some
are good, and some are bad. ال main difference is how and where the
لاعب has agency in the frustration.
Outside Frustration: If the لاعب has no agency, then هو - هي’s outside
frustration. It يستطيع be annoying, but هو - هي’s less personal so thus less

impactful. أنا يستطيع get frustrated watching a communication problem
unfold in an episode of a sitcom, but أنا don’t feel هو - هي personally.
Uncontrolled Frustration: Once the لاعب has control of the action,
the potential for emotional involvement is higher. Give me buttons to
press and now any failure is my fault. So, the worst case here is when
the لاعب has input but no real control. If the لاعب expects to have
control but loses due to reasons outside of their control, الذي - التي يستطيع be
very frustrating. ال لعبة made a promise and then failed to deliver.
This is often the worst form of frustration and لعبة designer should be
careful to avoid situations like هذا. If the لاعب needs to fail
regardless of their actions, make هو - هي very clear الذي - التي the لعبة knows هو - هي’s
not the لاعب’s fault.
Confused Frustration: If the لاعب has agency الذي - التي actually matters,
الذي - التي’s going to reduce the negative impact of the frustration. But هذا is
only true if the لاعب understands all الذي - التي. If the لاعب doesn’t
understand how their actions influence the outcome, they might مثل well
not have agency. This is where many ألعاب fall apart, especially for
more casual audiences. It’s very frustrating to press buttons and not
understand why they matter. And الذي - التي understanding is entirely the
responsibility of the لعبة designer. Remember, the لاعب only knows
what comes through الذي - التي tiny funnel of information they see on the
pixels on the screen. If they aren’t able to construct a full mental model
of the logic going on inside the computer, to expect, they’re going to
have some negative frustration. In many cases, the hard part of being a
لعبة designer isn’t coming up with good ideas; هو - هي’s getting the لاعب
to understand those good ideas.
Difficult Frustration: Agency الذي - التي matters and makes sense is not
enough. ال challenges also have to be fair. Banging your head against

an impossible challenge يستطيع be a positive type of frustration (cough
Elden Ring cough), but not for all players. Some players want more
manageable challenges and find extreme difficulty to be bad
frustration. But the inverse is also true – a لاعب who enjoys mastering
a skill may consider a sequence of easy challenges to be frustrating in
a very different way. Finding the right balance for the audience of your
لعبة يستطيع be difficult – more on الذي - التي later.
Fun Frustration: Finally, in some cases, players have agency,
understand the consequences of their actions, and still fail. This is
called gameplay. If the لاعب understands why they failed, the
frustration from the failure is much less. In the best cases, frustration is
a fuel الذي - التي drives the لاعب to come back and try again. Games are
built on iteration, both مثل a development practice and مثل a لاعب
strategy. A good لعبة will create positive feelings of frustration الذي - التي
guide the لاعب to an emotional response along the lines of “أنا يستطيع do
better”. Which is a great lesson to learn for life, even outside of the
magic circle.

Meaning
أنا think هو - هي’s important to understand what ألعاب mean. Since ألعاب are a
relatively new form of art, we don’t always think of them مثل having an
impact on the world. But they do. ال person who starts playing a لعبة is
different from the person after the لعبة is done. Games make people think
about things. Games change the world.
For many ألعاب, هذا is not the primary goal of the لعبة. It might be
money. It might be providing a simple fun time. But meaning happens
whether the creator intends هو - هي or not. أنا understand programming better
because أنا played Robo-Rally. Some of my love of creativity and creative

problem-solving comes from early Infocom text adventures. Minecraft has
made a generation of kids think differently about creation and resources and
exploration and problem-solving.
أنا don’t think any لعبة has one discrete meaning. Even ألعاب with a
clear intended meaning will be interpreted differently by each لاعب who
encounters هو - هي. So, when أنا talk about meaning in the ألعاب in هذا book, أنا
don’t intend to exclude other meanings. When we talk about هذا in class,
every semester has different answers and they’re all right.
For me, مجرفة Knight is about persistence. It’s not the only لعبة where
the main character is beaten down constantly and has to constantly get up,
but هو - هي’s a clear example of الذي - التي style of play. أنا’m not the most skilled لاعب,
so أنا tend to die a lot. But the only time أنا feel like أنا’m losing is when أنا put
the لعبة away and give up on saving poor Shield Knight.
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 3
حلوى معجب Saga / Goals
DOI: 10.1201/9781003346586-3

حلوى معجب Saga
حلوى معجب Saga is a great لعبة.
حلوى معجب Saga (Figure 3.1) is a mobile لعبة released by King (now
part of Microsoft) in 2012. Since launch, هو - هي has consistently been one of the
most popular ألعاب on mobile, with hundreds of thousands of monthly
users Curry, D. (2024).

Figure 3.1 حلوى معجب Saga screen.
أنا’ve never worked on حلوى معجب Saga, but أنا did work on a competitor.
When أنا was at a studio called Zindagi, we designed a match-3 called Crazy
Cake Swap based on a similar puzzle لعبة called Crazy Kitchen. ال
studio got bought by Zynga and didn’t stay around for long after الذي - التي, but أنا
know هذا genre better than أنا know most genres.

حلوى معجب Saga – Gameplay Dissection
Verbs
To understand حلوى معجب Saga, let’s start where we always do: verbs.
What يستطيع the لاعب do in حلوى معجب Saga?
In هذا case, هو - هي’s a simple answer: swap. ال لاعب يستطيع touch a candy in
the grid and then slide هو - هي to an adjacent candy. When the لاعب does هذا,
the two candies swap positions. That is the entirety of the لاعب’s active
contribution to the core loop (Figure 3.2). There are some interesting less
active things the لاعب does while swapping, such مثل “Scan” and “Predict”,
but these aren’t the simple button actions, so we’ll save discussion of those
for later in هذا chapter.

Figure 3.2 Inputs.

ال core loop continues from there, though (Figure 3.3). After the لاعب
makes a swap, the لعبة rules check to see if either candy creates a line of
three or more. If هو - هي doesn’t, the swap is canceled. If هو - هي does, the لعبة
removes those candies, possibly with an extra effect if the line is four or
more candies. Then the remaining candies fall to fill the empty space, which
يستطيع possibly create new matches and cause a chain reaction مثل each match
creates new matches.

Figure 3.3 Outputs.
ال لاعب performs a simple action, and the لعبة rules result in
complex outcomes. This is one of the strengths of video ألعاب – the
processing burden of the لعبة يستطيع be placed on the computer’s shoulders.
ال rules of حلوى معجب would be much less fun مثل a board لعبة where
the players have to move each candy by hand and figure out the outcome of
each new position.
Swapping and the reactions to الذي - التي swap is the heart of حلوى معجب
Saga, and the core loop of any match-3 لعبة.
And for completeness, حلوى معجب Saga also has a few special case
verbs:

1. Players يستطيع use powerups such مثل the lollipop to remove specific
candies or otherwise affect the grid outside of swap actions. Outside of
the tutorials الذي - التي teach these interactions, they are never required to
complete a level, but they are always there for the لاعب to use. But
they are a limited resource الذي - التي يستطيع only be acquired مثل an occasional
reward or for money.
2. Late in the لعبة, there are new board elements الذي - التي include an
interactive choice by the لاعب. For example, حلوى Frogs let players
choose where to place them when they go off.
3. Secondary modes like events provide a choice of what to play and
sometimes have some basic decision-making in the event itself.
So outside of these caveats, the verb of حلوى معجب Saga is “swap”.

Goals
ال gameplay goal of حلوى معجب Saga varies based on the level. All
goals revolve around clearing things off the board, but the nuances of
exactly what أنت’re trying to do يستطيع change:
1. Clear a certain number of candies.
2. Clear a certain number of candies of a particular type.
3. Clear a certain number of special objects, like cherries, by dropping
them to the bottom of the grid.
4. Remove a certain number of non-candy obstacles, such مثل jellies.
5. Etc.
More on هذا in a moment.

Challenge
ال real variety in حلوى معجب Saga (and most match-3 ألعاب) comes
from the randomness of the falling pieces and the variety of obstacles الذي - التي
make reaching the goal difficult. Most levels have more than just candies on
the board – a large variety of different objects create additional challenges
and opportunities for the لاعب. These range from simple inert objects الذي - التي
are removed when matches are made near them (Frosting), to inert objects
الذي - التي expand across the grid over time (Chocolate), to snakes الذي - التي charge into
baskets after enough matches are made next to them (حلوى Cobra). These
aren’t all dangerous – there are also advanced board elements الذي - التي يستطيع be
useful, such مثل conveyor belts, or are almost purely beneficial, such مثل the
UFO الذي - التي drops special candies.
These obstacles are key to حلوى معجب Saga’s success. ال basic
concepts of the match-3 genre existed before حلوى معجب Saga.
Specifically, the concepts of the genre were solidified in Bejeweled (2001)
and Bejeweled Blitz (2009). Many of the core ideas were present in earlier
ألعاب like Shariki (1994). ال core gameplay is very directly based on
previous ألعاب like Bejeweled. But those previous ألعاب used only a
single level – there were no obstacles and just one board. حلوى معجب
Saga innovated by adding a variety of levels with different obstacles and a
different grid layout for each level. This gave the existing fun core
gameplay more variety and long-term appeal. Bejeweled was successful, but
حلوى معجب Saga took الذي - التي success to vast new heights by adding varied
challenges and a stronger sense of progression.
ال sense of progression comes from the “Saga” in the title. One of the
big innovations of حلوى معجب Saga was the Saga Map. It’s not just الذي - التي
the لاعب was given a variety of levels with different obstacles, هو - هي’s also
important الذي - التي these levels were set up مثل a line – a path to a destination.

Once the لاعب completes a level, they move on to the next one, heading
toward the end. ال Saga Map organizes هذا progression in a simple line,
showing the لاعب the next levels they’ll be playing. This came out when
social gaming was king, so the line also shows أنت where your friends are,
creating some social pressure to advance. But the key concept here is الذي - التي
the لاعب is always doing something new, and has a sense of progression
الذي - التي makes them want to come back tomorrow and try again. Progression is
a great driver for players, in any form.
ال basic flow of the لعبة is simple – the لاعب swaps to clear the
level, with various obstacles in the way. But the obstacles and goals change
in each level, مثل shown in Figure 3.4, making the simple flow work for a
long time.

Figure 3.4 حلوى معجب Saga flow: Simple diagram showing
Actions, Challenges, and Goals, with lots of variation on the
Obstacles and Goals.

حلوى معجب Saga – Non-Gameplay
Dissection
Technology
حلوى معجب is a fairly simple لعبة الذي - التي relies on a vast network of
advanced technologies to work. This is one of the fun daily realities of the
world we live in. ال rules of the لعبة and the interactions the لاعب
experiences are built on easy-to-understand combinations of simple shapes.
This is good لعبة design and keeps the لاعب engaged. But the rest of the
experience is built on touch screens and constant online communication and
vast behind-the-scenes databases الذي - التي are way more powerful than the
technology الذي - التي brought humans to the moon.
One thing الذي - التي is important to think about مثل a لعبة designer is how
these vast changes in the world of technology affect your لعبة. New
technology comes along all the time, and some of هو - هي is a great fit for new
types of ألعاب. Sometimes there is a direct linkage between a new
technology and a new style of لعبة, such مثل GPS-enabling Pokémon Go
(2016). Sometimes the changes are more subtle and need time and thought
to understand. It’s not obvious (except in retrospect) الذي - التي improvements in
computer miniaturization and wireless communication would lead to
everyone having a powerful connected computer in their pocket at all times.
And even then, هو - هي’s less obvious الذي - التي هو - هي would lead to people looking for
ألعاب الذي - التي they يستطيع pick up and play at any time for very short play
sessions. Technology doesn’t only change what people يستطيع do with ألعاب,
هو - هي changes what they want to do and when they want to do هو - هي and for how
long. ال changes to the rules of technology create changes to the dynamics
of how people interact with technology, but more on the word “dynamics”

in Chapter 4. These changes يستطيع be harder to predict but provide great value
for your لعبة designs once أنت notice them.

Senses
حلوى معجب Saga looks cartoony and childish. Everything is in bold,
bright colors. ال candies are simple and iconic. ال لعبة is not subtle in
its communication; if هو - هي wants أنت to know something, هو - هي will shout هو - هي rather
than whisper هو - هي. At a glance, أنت might guess الذي - التي هذا is a لعبة for
children. But the majority of players are adults.
Clearly, هذا works for حلوى معجب Saga. ال لعبة is immensely
successful, and there’s no reason to think الذي - التي the bright cartoony style
holds هو - هي back. Various clones and imitators have tried to re-theme match-3
gameplay in darker, more adult styles and failed. Childish works for adults.
On one level, هذا could be pure nostalgia. Adults want a moment to relax
and escape from their everyday world, so something الذي - التي evokes pleasant
childhood memories could be just the thing. ال reason childish works
might be because adults want to feel like children.
On another level, childish might work because childish is good design.
Kids are not the only ones who like bold, bright colors. Iconic shapes are
easy to distinguish and help make gameplay easy to understand. Direct
clear communication is good for everyone, including adults who are trying
to just relax. ال design principles الذي - التي work for children also work for
adults. It’s not childish design, هو - هي’s just good design.
This is not to say الذي - التي حلوى معجب Saga is constructed in a childish way.
There is a lot of attention to detail and polish in حلوى معجب Saga. When أنا
started working on match-3 ألعاب, one of the first things أنا did was spend a
week analyzing some of the top ألعاب, and some of the worst ألعاب. أنا
recorded a few levels of حلوى معجب Saga and then literally watched the

recording frame by frame to see exactly how everything moved and all the
little tricks of presentation. It’s a very useful exercise if أنت’re trying to
understand polish and presentation. Make sure أنت do the same with some
less successful ألعاب to really see the differences.

Freeze Frame
Things أنا saw by watching every frame of حلوى معجب Saga:
Be really careful with motion. Humans know how falling looks and expect things to
accelerate and decelerate in certain ways. Falling at a constant speed is easier to code but
looks weird.
You يستطيع cover up lots of things with explosions. Don’t bother with expensive
transformations if an explosion will feel just مثل good or better.
Squash and stretch. This is an animation term for changing the shape of an object to
emphasize an impact. It really works.
Anticipation. Building up to a reward is مثل important مثل paying off the reward. Adding a
few frames of buildup makes almost everything better.
Sequencing. Know the order of events and keep الذي - التي holy. It’ll help players understand
what’s happening and هو - هي’ll keep your لعبة logic and code understandable.
Compression. When أنت have lots of things الذي - التي need to happen at once, أنت يستطيع break
the Sequencing rule and have things overlap a bit. But do هو - هي in a logical and constrained
way. Think through what the لاعب needs to focus on, and do some hand-waving in other
places.

Emotion and Narrative
حلوى معجب Saga is not a deeply emotional لعبة. There is no complex
storyline to follow with deeply realized characters following narrative arcs
who the لاعب grows to care about. There is a simple story الذي - التي presents a
problem to solve, and then a few levels later congratulates أنت for solving
هو - هي. This is enough story to give أنت a reason to continue, but حلوى معجب
Saga is not a لعبة where the majority of players are advancing to find out
what happens next.

حلوى معجب Saga does hit emotional notes through the gameplay.
حلوى معجب Saga is a لعبة of constant rewards. Whenever أنت do
anything in the لعبة, something explodes and the لعبة tells أنت how great
أنت are. This is maybe not the most emotionally deep reward system, and أنا
wouldn’t trust the لعبة’s praise to evaluate my self-worth, but sometimes
هو - هي’s just nice to hear praise. Constant rewards يستطيع be emotionally soothing.
A working mom who is having a hard day and just wants to catch their
breath and relax doesn’t need a لعبة الذي - التي constantly tells them they’ve died
and need to start everything over. حلوى معجب Saga does have fail states,
and هو - هي does apply a little bit of emotional pressure in those moments (mostly
to encourage the لاعب to spend money), but الذي - التي’s the exception, not the
rule. Most of the time, playing حلوى معجب Saga is soaking in a warm bed
of reward and praise. Some ألعاب are here to give people what they want.

Money
How does حلوى معجب Saga make money?
ال other big innovation حلوى معجب Saga added to the match-3 genre,
other than the level variety demonstrated in the “Saga” part of the title, is
the monetization model. حلوى معجب Saga is free to download and to play.
All ten thousand plus levels are free to access. But the لعبة constantly asks
أنت to spend money on other things. Powerups. Unlimited lives. Extra
turns. Special modes.
Free-to-play business models drive most of the sales in the ألعاب
industry these days. And they work. Most of the players in these ألعاب pay
nothing. A small percentage pay something. And an even smaller
percentage pay a lot. These are the “whales” – the large spenders who keep
everyone else afloat.

ال morality of the free-to-play model is a hotly debated topic. There are
certainly companies trying to suck every penny out of their players, and
using some questionable approaches to do الذي - التي. No one should be exploiting
gambling addictions or tricking children into spending their parent’s money
or promising things to players الذي - التي will never materialize.
But most free-to-play ألعاب, such مثل حلوى معجب Saga, are not الذي - التي
bad. Every monetization model – arcade cabinets, CDs in boxes,
hypercasual ad-driven ألعاب – is trying to use human psychology to get
people to buy things. At some level, all marketing is manipulation. But الذي - التي
doesn’t mean هو - هي has to be an entirely bad thing. Good marketing is
manipulating people to notice things الذي - التي they want and will enjoy. And أنا
believe الذي - التي most free-to-play ألعاب are actually providing a valuable
service to people. People need entertainment and ألعاب are generally a
good deal in the entertainment world. Free-to-play allows most people to
get their entertainment for free, with some advertisements مثل the cost. And
the people who want to spend more and يستطيع afford هو - هي fund the rest of the
players.
أنا’ve done interviews with whales. Most of them are very happy with their
purchases and would spend the money the same way again. They have
disposable income, and هذا is how they choose to use هو - هي. Rich people spend
money on much sillier things than mobile ألعاب. You يستطيع find people who
overspend or otherwise have a negative spending experience, but even
among whales most of the transactions are mutually beneficial.
حلوى معجب Saga is a quality لعبة. Spending some money to make the
experience better is not unreasonable. أنا’m personally a free-to-play لاعب
(most of the time – أنا’ll spend a little money to support ألعاب أنا particularly
enjoy), but أنا understand why people would spend without being coerced.
ال free-to-play model isn’t perfect, and if أنا could wave a magic wand and

let everyone play and make ألعاب and all be rich أنا would, but أنا believe الذي - التي
free-to-play is only problematic when abused.

History
Mobile ألعاب are the core of the ألعاب industry these days. Console ألعاب
and PC ألعاب are still going strong, but in terms of dollars spent, mobile
ألعاب are bigger than everything else combined.
Mobile ألعاب took a while to get there, though. In the early days of the
mobile لعبة market, there was a lot of experimentation and uncertainty. No
one knew what would succeed.
Some companies tried releasing console-quality ألعاب (Infinity Blade
(2010)) or literal ports of PC or console ألعاب (Return to Monkey
Island (2022, mobile 2023), Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas (2002,
mobile 2013), XCOM: Enemy Within (2013, mobile 2014)). Neither of
these approaches became dominant, but there were a few notable
successes, such مثل a little title called Minecraft (2009, mobile 2011).
Although even Minecraft dropped its price significantly compared to
other platforms.
Some ألعاب experimented with the novelty of touch screen inputs.
Games like Flight Control (2009) or Where’s My Water? (2011)
discovered new styles of لعبة الذي - التي wouldn’t work with a controller.
These generally did well and أنت يستطيع see new innovations come out
and succeed regularly. A lot of the modern innovation in هذا area is in
the hypercasual genre where innovative ideas are needed to grab
people’s attention (and then throw a lot of ads at them).
This was also the early days of the shift to digital distribution across
the industry. Games could now be services with new content flowing
to players مثل quickly مثل هو - هي could be approved by Apple. Pocket God

(2009) was an interesting experiment in هذا space, updating مثل quickly
مثل possible with big new features changing the very nature of the لعبة
regularly. Games الذي - التي play like Pocket God aren’t common these days,
but the model of constant meaningful updates has become very
common and remains successful, even on other platforms like Roblox
or for other ألعاب like Fortnite (2017).
Along with other changes, monetization was also uncertain. At first,
companies thought الذي - التي mobile gamers would pay something close to
console price, or at least similar to the downloadable markets الذي - التي were
developing on consoles and on Steam. But مثل companies experimented
with pricing, they found الذي - التي lower prices worked. ال increase in
sales offset the drop in price, so soon Angry Birds (2009) was the top
of the Grossing chart at the lowest possible price – 99 cents. Then
Apple added the option to sell things inside the لعبة, and in-app
purchases were born. Immediately, ألعاب like Smurf Village (2010)
discovered الذي - التي free was even more appealing to people than 99 cents.
ال modern free-to-play model was born.
In هذا era, mobile ألعاب were also learning a lot from social ألعاب.
Facebook was a huge platform for ألعاب for a few years, before changes to
the advertising structure and success of mobile killed هو - هي. Social ألعاب
pioneered many of the free-to-play principles الذي - التي later dominated the
mobile market.
حلوى معجب Saga was originally a Facebook لعبة. And before الذي - التي, هو - هي
was originally a web لعبة. King, the company الذي - التي makes حلوى معجب
Saga, has used an interesting method for testing out new titles. They
generally release lots of new ألعاب first on their web browser and see how
they perform there. ال best-performing titles are considered for conversion
to other platforms. At the time, Facebook was considered the first step and

mobile was a new and experimental platform. So, حلوى معجب Saga first
appeared مثل حلوى معجب, a web لعبة without the level variety الذي - التي made
حلوى معجب Saga so successful. ال Saga idea first appeared in Bubble
Witch Saga and proved successful. When King brought their score attack
match-3 حلوى معجب over to Facebook, they added similar Saga elements.
حلوى معجب Saga did great on Facebook, so within a few months هو - هي was
brought over to mobile مثل well.
By the time حلوى معجب Saga came to mobile (2012), the battle over
pricing was mostly done. ال free-to-play models الذي - التي had been pioneered
in Facebook were dominating on mobile. So, حلوى معجب Saga launched
for free, with strong social elements. Many of those social elements have
faded to the background over the years مثل the industry has continued to
evolve and updates have changed حلوى معجب Saga. Competing for high
scores against your friends, or for progress along the Saga, used to be
prominently displayed but now is more of an afterthought.
So, حلوى معجب Saga came into the market at the right time with an
innovative take on both the gameplay of match-3 and the free-to-play
monetization model. ال لعبة was a hit from day one. King already knew
الذي - التي هو - هي had a good chance, based on its success on other platforms, but
nothing is certain in هذا industry. In هذا case, هو - هي worked. حلوى معجب Saga
was so successful هو - هي spawned multiple sequels, a line of merchandizing, and
even a short-lived network television لعبة show. And هو - هي became my wife’s
favorite video لعبة.

Meaning
What is حلوى معجب Saga about? What does حلوى معجب Saga say about
the world? How does playing حلوى معجب Saga change how أنت see the
world?

To me, حلوى معجب Saga is about the joy of unintended consequences.
ال لاعب makes a seemingly simple innocuous action, and suddenly the
screen is filled with colorful explosions and some guy with a deep voice is
calling out compliments. ال لاعب didn’t plan الذي - التي out. ال لاعب didn’t
know exactly what was going to happen. But like many things in life, taking
الذي - التي first step leads to all sorts of unknown things.
حلوى معجب Saga is the type of لعبة الذي - التي doesn’t really challenge the
لاعب. Sure, some levels are nearly impossible, but those levels generally
require luck to complete along with skill. Mostly حلوى معجب Saga is a
warm bath of compliments and pleasant explosions. And أنا believe these
types of ألعاب make the world a better place. People need comfort. People
need more praise in their lives. If a لعبة يستطيع help people be happy and get
through their lives, أنا support الذي - التي. Since the dawn of time, humans have
sought escapism. That need is deep in the human psyche. Games are the
latest delivery method. أنا’m not going to fight against the human psyche. Let
people enjoy simple fun.

Goals
Verbs tend to work together. In مجرفة Knight, أنا يستطيع move, and أنا يستطيع attack.
أنا’m generally more successful in the لعبة when أنا combine these verbs. أنا
don’t move, pause, wait, then attack. أنا attack while أنا’m moving. أنا look
around while أنا’m moving. أنا don’t stop and pause; أنا’m constantly
performing all the actions at one time and الذي - التي’s part of what makes these
ألعاب challenging and interesting. Not all players يستطيع manage the feats of
dexterity and rapid stimulus processing required to be successful at moveshovel when they all have to be done together.
ال لاعب’s goals يستطيع also work هذا way. When أنا’m moving to line up a
shot, أنا’m also considering how to best avoid the line of fire of another

enemy at the same time. Goals يستطيع be combined just like actions يستطيع be
combined (Figure 3.5). But goals are even more likely to be layered rather
than combined.

Figure 3.5 Two Verbs merging into a bigger verb.
Look at حلوى معجب Saga. If أنت chose a random second of a لاعب’s
session in حلوى معجب Saga, the verb is likely to be “swap”. Maybe “look”
if أنت accept الذي - التي مثل a valid verb. But the لاعب’s goals are going to hit
many different layers of analysis:
1. Making a match
2. Having هذا match lead to a chain reaction or create a power gem
3. Having هذا match lead to a better board state when هو - هي’s done
4. Removing lots of gems
5. Making progress toward the goal of هذا level
6. Scoring points
7. Beating هذا level
8. Beating هذا level with three stars
9. Completing an event or challenge goal

10. Getting to the end of the level progression
11. Getting a better score than my friends
12. Relaxing
13. Helping the cute little puppet creature to complete its goal
14. Clearing the chocolate
15. Removing the blockers
16. A very large number of level-specific goal types الذي - التي أنا could list but
then هذا chapter would become boring and repetitive and مثل a لعبة
designer أنا try to avoid boring things
This is normal. In ألعاب مثل well مثل life, a single action rarely has a single
goal. Goals come in herds. Some with subtle nuanced distinctions, and
some coming from completely different directions. أنا want to beat the level.
أنا want to beat the level with three stars. أنا want to beat the level with a
higher score than my brother. These are expressions of the same base goal
but with different nuances. From a لعبة design standpoint, these يستطيع be
merged into a larger goal: success in the level (Figure 3.6).

Figure 3.6 Two goals merging into a bigger goal.

ال bigger differences between goals are often based on scale. أنا want هذا
action to clear lots of gems. أنا want to beat the whole level. أنا want to get to
the end of the لعبة progression. أنا want the action أنا’m performing now to
make me successful now, soon, and in the future. This sort of layering of
goals is very important to لعبة design. Game designers like to talk about
goals مثل onions – one goal is contained within the other goal (Figure 3.7).
Progress toward one smaller goal also progresses أنت toward a larger goal.

Figure 3.7 One goal inside another goal.
So, both goals progress based on the same لاعب action, but the second
goal is bigger so هو - هي takes longer. Completing the first goal is a step toward
completing the second goal. When أنت complete the first goal, أنت still
have the second goal to keep أنت driving forward. At no point does the
لاعب complete one goal and have nothing left to do. For a لعبة designer,
a لاعب with “nothing left to do” is a problem – they’re likely to leave the
لعبة and go do something else. Layered goals fix هذا by keeping the
لاعب motivated at all times.

In حلوى معجب Saga, a لاعب may say الذي - التي their goal is to beat هذا
level. But to do الذي - التي, they need to find and make matches. Once they
complete the small goal and make الذي - التي match, they are (hopefully) closer to
their big goal of completing the level. But now they have to start another
loop of activity to find another match and complete الذي - التي small goal again.
Only after a few dozen small goals is the large goal reached.
And once the large goal is reached, the لاعب is taken back to the Saga
Map where they remember الذي - التي the large goal is just a small step toward the
ultimate long-term goal of progressing to the next story bit or to beat a
friend or to reach “the end”.
So maybe goals aren’t onions. Maybe goals are garlic. One head of garlic
seems like a single unified thing but when أنت break into هو - هي, أنت find many
smaller versions inside (Figure 3.8).

Figure 3.8 Many goals inside another goal.
This is good psychology. Humans like to group things and draw lines
around them. Part of the fun of goals is getting to define a task and then
check هو - هي off your to-do list. Completing a goal is fun.

And to be clear, هذا isn’t a monetization trick. This is what makes the
لعبة fun. “Engagement” is a key goal of free-to-play ألعاب, and هو - هي does
drive monetization. But هو - هي’s also a sign الذي - التي players are having fun. In my
opinion, the best way to drive monetization is to make sure the لاعب is
having fun and engagement is one way to identify when الذي - التي’s happening.
This is why layers are great. If there is always something more to do, the
لاعب is never looking at an empty checklist. When they complete one
check box and get الذي - التي hit of serotonin, there are still more checkboxes to
do. Not just the next one, but one الذي - التي’s halfway finished. Or even better,
one الذي - التي’s just about to be finished. If أنت’re at 4% progress toward a goal,
there’s no pressure to stay in the لعبة and complete هو - هي. But if أنت’re at
96%, then أنت might مثل well play one more level to finish هو - هي off. And then
when أنت do, there will be another goal at 97% waiting for أنت.
This is present in many ألعاب:
Civilization and other 4x strategy ألعاب are well-known for promoting
“one more turn” gameplay where there are many different layers of
goals الذي - التي overlap in complex ways, ensuring there is always one more
thing to do.
Boss levels are another way to promote players’ desire to check off
boxes. ال boss is the hardest part of the level, but هو - هي always shows up
when أنت’re already past 90% complete. ال temptation to check off
الذي - التي box is part of why boss levels are so motivating.
Role-playing ألعاب (RPGs) offer multiple forms of progression –
story quests, side quests, character stats, faction relationships, skill
points, equipment, etc. This ensures الذي - التي whenever a لاعب completes
a goal, there are more things to do.
You يستطيع see هذا in the evolution of حلوى معجب Saga.

Match-3 ألعاب such مثل Bejeweled existed before حلوى معجب Saga,
with very similar core gameplay loops, even down to the specific power
gem abilities. But when حلوى معجب Saga came out, its sales and
engagement blew them all away. حلوى معجب Saga succeeded in large part
because of the Saga goal structure. ال Saga structure takes a fun core
gameplay loop الذي - التي had been mastered in previous match-3 ألعاب (Figure
3.9) and adds another layer of goals on top of هو - هي. You still want to make
good matches and get a good score, but now there are two new layers.

Figure 3.9 Goals merge: Make match, Create combos, Gain
points.
In the time-battle-based style of ألعاب like Bejeweled, there’s no way to
“beat” a level. You يستطيع get a good score, but أنت يستطيع never check off a box
الذي - التي says the level is done.
ال Saga map gives a clearer sense of progress on an individual level.
You يستطيع “beat” الذي - التي level, even if there’s always room to go back and
improve your score (Figure 3.10).

Figure 3.10 Same, but with a bigger circle around هو - هي: Beat level.
And once أنت beat a level, أنت’re taken back to الذي - التي map and shown the
true goal – long-term progression. In Bejeweled, the end of a level may or
may not check a personal goal box depending on your final score. In حلوى
معجب Saga, أنت’re usually checking at least one box and maybe more
(Figure 3.11). And أنت’re reminded of all the remaining boxes أنت يستطيع
check in the future. That’s much more emotionally compelling and drives
long-term retention in a great way.

Figure 3.11 Same, but with a bigger circle around هو - هي: Complete
لعبة.

Other Goals
Looking at the list of goals, some are groups of related tasks (various ways
to evaluate a move), some are garlic cloves of related progression (move,
level, لعبة), but some don’t fit either of these categories. Things like
“relax” or “help the puppet” suggest الذي - التي there is a lot of room for other
types of goals.
Helping the puppet is an example of a narrative goal. ال لاعب is
motivated by emotional goals created by the لعبة’s story, especially when
mixed with the motivation to progress a narrative forward. These are
powerful goals for humans, مثل storytelling and completion are deeply
woven into humanity. For many ألعاب, just هذا goal motivation is enough
to invest time and effort into a full story with (expensive) cinematics. Core
gameplay drives players forward, and progression keeps them wanting
more, but deep engagement requires some emotional investment.
Other goals like “relax” suggest الذي - التي the لاعب may have goals for
playing the لعبة الذي - التي are outside the structure of the لعبة. ال لعبة
doesn’t directly have a relax button, and none of the explosions الذي - التي occur
when candies match are directly designed to ensure لاعب relaxation.
Relaxation is the reason the لاعب comes to the لعبة, not something the
لعبة directly produces. When all the parts of the لعبة are working
correctly, هذا goal will be the result. These sorts of goals are important to
look for and understand in your ألعاب. Just because they’re not entirely
driven by لعبة features doesn’t mean الذي - التي أنت مثل a لعبة designer يستطيع’t
influence them. Understanding what your players want inside and outside
the لعبة is critical.

Player-Generated Goals
One type of goal الذي - التي doesn’t show up in the goal list is لاعب-generated
goals. ال list focuses on goals الذي - التي the لعبة creates and enforces, but
humans love to generate and track goals on their own. Every time أنت
generate a to-do list and mentally check off items مثل they’re completed,
أنت’re acting مثل your own لعبة designer to structure and motivate daily
life. Players do هذا during ألعاب, too. In حلوى معجب, players might strive
to clear a certain area or create a certain combo even if the لعبة doesn’t
ask them to. This is good.
As a لعبة designer, أنت يستطيع’t force players to make their own goals. But
أنت يستطيع create an environment where goals are easy to make and track and
enjoy. ال more freedom the لعبة gives the لاعب to try divergent actions,
the more players are going to find them and enjoy them. Players like
interacting with everything in the لعبة world, which is something most
لعبة designs should encourage. Finding ways to give strong feedback
during these actions helps the لاعب know الذي - التي their actions matter and الذي - التي
the لعبة recognizes what they did. When أنا was working on Paperboy 64
(1999) (my first full لعبة design), we made sure الذي - التي almost everything
reacted when being hit by a newspaper. ال لاعب was only meant to target
a few specific things, but the world is much more fun and engaging if
everything reacts. And if a لاعب wants to focus on throwing papers at dogs
to keep them away from cats, they يستطيع do الذي - التي. They don’t earn points for هو - هي,
but the لعبة still creates these little scenarios with emotional potential and
shows the لاعب الذي - التي their actions have consequences.
Player-generated goals are also an important driver for gameplay goals.
During early playtests, keep an eye out for things players try to do. Ask
players what their goal is. If players want to do something, the لعبة should
recognize and reward هو - هي. In some cases, take those personal goals and make

them into gameplay goals. But if الذي - التي’s not appropriate, take those personal
goals and acknowledge الذي - التي they matter. Keep track of them in the design to
make sure they remain fun مثل the لعبة changes and iterates. If possible,
track them and give the لاعب a small thumbs up in-لعبة when they
complete الذي - التي goal, even if هو - هي’s unrelated to the main goal. Players like a pat
on the back, so give them مثل much feedback مثل أنت يستطيع to make الذي - التي
happen.

Events
Since launch, حلوى معجب Saga has been finding ways to push the لاعب’s
ability to complete goals even further. One of the most successful features
in many free-to-play ألعاب is the event. For example, in حلوى معجب
Saga, they might have a special race where the لاعب is rewarded for
completing a certain number of levels before other players do. In the current
builds of حلوى معجب Saga, some of these “events” have become
important enough to bake back into the main لعبة progression cycle. They
started مثل special events الذي - التي only appeared occasionally but now are just
something الذي - التي happens naturally during play.
There are a lot of good psychological hooks built into limited-time
events.
Players love getting more things “for free”.
They encourage coming back soon, so أنت يستطيع complete the goal
before the event ends.
They feel special and often emphasize the unique never-before-seen
qualities of هذا event.
If the goals are set up right, they scratch competitive urges in a way
الذي - التي doesn’t automatically advantage expert players.

In حلوى معجب Saga, events are a great way to add an intermediate layer of
goals. حلوى معجب Saga does a great job of providing immediate goals,
and the Saga Map provides a great long-term goal. But the long-term of the
Saga Map يستطيع be pretty far off, especially now الذي - التي there are thousands and
thousands of levels. ال motivation to reach the end of the map now takes
multiple years to complete. So, there’s a need for more checkboxes between
the “complete a level” box and the “beat the لعبة” box.
Events provide a goal الذي - التي is bigger than a single level but is still realistic
to actually complete. A لاعب may never reach level 20,000, but they يستطيع
earn the free powerup by collecting a few more levels to win the race. It
doesn’t even matter if they want a free powerup – هو - هي will still motivate them
to push forward just to check the box. Humans are weird الذي - التي way.
Being able to see هذا in retrospect is a sign of a reasonably skilled
designer. But the real trick is identifying هذا before the feature is
implemented. A really talented لعبة designer would be able to look at
حلوى معجب Saga at launch and identify the goal layers. A really really
talented لعبة designer would be able to do الذي - التي, and then notice الذي - التي the
goal layers are fairly far apart. Even with only 80 levels, the motivation to
complete a level and the motivation to complete the لعبة have a big gap.
And هو - هي takes a really really really talented لعبة designer to do all الذي - التي, and
then design the right solution to fix الذي - التي problem while also fixing a few
other problems along the way. أنا never worked at King, so أنا don’t know who
came up with the idea to add the events. But they deserve a raise.
(أنا’d be willing to guess هو - هي wasn’t a single person sitting down doing هذا
analysis and going “Aha!”. It was almost certainly a joint effort by many
people who fed each other small good ideas and then tested and iterated on
those ideas to find the best ones. Someone along the way probably noticed
the goal structures and might have advocated strongly for certain ideas

based on هو - هي, but in ألعاب good things rarely happen because of one
moment. Games are made by teams, and good ألعاب are made by
iteration.)

